Aaron F. Libby (born April 4, 1983) is an American politician from Maine. Libby, a Republican from Waterboro, Maine, served in the Maine House of Representatives from December 2010 to December 2014. Libby's district comprised Waterboro and parts of Lyman. In April 2014, Libby announced that he would not seek re-election.


== Election ==
Libby first ran in 2010 as a Republican, defeating Democrat incumbent Joseph Wagner in District 139. He ran successfully for a second term in 2012, again defeating Wagner. He was endorsed by Ron Paul, Susan Collins, Defense of Liberty PAC, the Maine Republican Liberty Caucus, and Liberty Candidates.


== Political positions ==
Libby has been described as a libertarian. He supports free market policies and minimal federal regulation of state commerce. Many of his positions, such as support for hard money policies and opposition to government regulation, have been influenced by the Austrian School of economic thought. He is a proponent of localism and the overall reduction of the size, power, and expenditure of both federal and state governments on Constitutionalist grounds.


== Tenure ==
As a freshman in the 125th Legislature, Libby was appointed to the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee. Libby has introduced bills to nullify the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, implement Constitutional Carry of firearms, eliminate a state sales tax on U.S. gold and silver coinage, prohibit enforcement of the National Defense Authorization Act, eliminate federal regulation of commerce within the state of Maine, and regulate pat-downs by state employees and contractors such as the Transportation Security Administration.Libby's Constitutional Carry bill was defeated in the Maine House of Representatives by a vote of 74 to 73.Libby supported Ron Paul for President in 2012, and later persuaded ten other state representatives to also endorse Paul. Libby was elected and served as a delegate supporting Paul at the 2012 Republican National Convention in Tampa, Florida.
In 2013, Libby co-sponsored a bill with Democratic Rep. Diane Russell to legalize the recreational use of cannabis.


== Personal life ==
Libby was born on April 4, 1983, in Sanford, Maine. He attended Massabesic High School, graduating in 2002. In 2012, Libby married Allison McGinley, who had attended Massabesic one year behind Libby. The couple reside in Waterboro, and own and operate Libby & Son U-Picks, a pick-your-own fruit farm in Limerick. Libby sits on the Executive Committee of the Maine State Pomological Society.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official legislative web site
Official campaign web site