Addicted is a 2014 American erotic drama thriller film directed by Bille Woodruff and starring  Sharon Leal, Boris Kodjoe, Tyson Beckford, Kat Graham, and William Levy. The film, based on Zane's best-selling novel of the same name and adapted by Christina Welsh and Ernie Barbarash, was released theatrically on January 30, 2014.


== Plot ==
Zoe Reynard (Sharon Leal) has the perfect life with her husband Jason (Boris Kodjoe) and two children, and is the CEO of her own company which signs and develops aspiring artists. One evening she attends an art show of Quinton Canosa (William Levy); the two meet and share some flirtation. Zoe later visits his apartment to discuss a contract, and the two have sex.
Zoe feels immense guilt and tries to end it with Quinton; they break up regularly but always inevitably end up getting back together. On one particular occasion, when Zoe goes to get back with Quinton, she finds him having sex with his neighbour.
Throughout the film, Zoe is telling this story as a flashback to her psychotherapist, Dr. Marcella Spencer (Tasha Smith), who after diagnosing her with sex addiction, assumes it might have been something from Zoe's past that keeps coming back to haunt her and pressures her to confess. However, each time her psychotherapist asks, Zoe avoids the question and walks out.
Zoe's addiction begins to take over her life; she soon begins sleeping with a second man, Corey (Tyson Beckford), whom she met at a club. One day, when she comes home from work, she finds Corey at her home talking to her mother. Seeing the danger she had put her family in, Zoe decides that she wants to try to fix her marriage with Jason. She invites both Corey and Quinton to meet her at Quinton's apartment and breaks up with both of them.
Corey becomes angry and lunges at her but Quinton blocks him. As Corey leaves, Quinton knocks him out with a vase. Zoe becomes afraid of Quinton and tries to calm him down; Quinton tells her that she is not going to leave him. Frightened, Zoe shoves glass artwork between them, smashing it to pieces. She then hides from Quinton who is chasing her with a knife. Suddenly Jason appears and smashes a sculpture over Quinton's head. 
Zoe runs after Jason, apologizing profusely, but he rejects her. Out of desperation, Zoe walks in front of car, injuring herself. The two split up and Jason stays in a hotel. Zoe becomes a recluse but soon goes to a sex addiction group-therapy session. It is discovered that the root of Zoe's addiction was because of a rape committed by three boys when she was 10 years old. At the session she speaks of her deep love for her husband, and Jason walks in, kisses her and accepts her back.


== Cast ==
Sharon Leal as Zoe Reynard, owner of Zoe & Co., an artist-marketing agency
Boris Kodjoe as Jason Reynard, Zoe's husband and an architect
William Levy as Quinton Canosa, an artist who becomes Zoe's lover
Brandon Gonzales as Tony
Tyson Beckford as Corey, one of Zoe's lovers
Katerina Graham as Diamond, Quinton's other lover
Tasha Smith as Dr. Marcella Spencer, a psychotherapist specializing in sexual addiction
Maria Howell as Nina
Garrett Hines as Benny
Emayatzy Corinealdi as Brina, Zoe's assistant and best friend
Hunter Burke as Shane
Cameron Mills as 10 year old Zoe
Daniel O'Callaghan as chubby businessman
Landon Runion]as  Peter Reynard, Zoe's son
Lauren Marquez as Kayla Reynard, Zoe's daughter
John Newberg as Balthazar Crayne
Paul Hall as Marley
Omar Mughal as handsome man


== Production ==
Principal photography began in November 2012 in Atlanta and the surrounding areas.


== Reception ==
Addicted received largely negative reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has a rating of 8%, based on 13 reviews, with an average rating of 3.2/10. On Metacritic, the film has a score of 32 out of 100, based on 9 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews".


== See also ==
List of black films of the 2010s


== References ==


== External links ==
Official page on Tumblr
Addicted on IMDb
Addicted at Box Office Mojo
Addicted at Rotten Tomatoes
Addicted at Metacritic