Akwamuhene is the paramount chief of the Akwamu State in Ghana. The current Akwamuhene is Odeneho Kwafo Akoto III. Odeneho Kwafo Akoto III, who was privately known as "Bernard Aboagye Owiredu" at the university of Central Florida, was nominated the "Paramount chief" of the Akwamu Traditional Area in Ghana, Africa on 11 February 2011. The Akwamu traditional area selected him based on his royal lineage by the queenmother and the royal family. As a Paramount chief, he oversees more than 60 divisional and sub-chiefs and [Queen-mothers]at varying levels from about
46 towns.


== Family background ==
Akwamuhene was born on 11 April 1967, privately known as Bernard Aboagye Owiredu, his royal majesty Odeneho Kwafo Akoto III, is the second child of Christian Boamah Djan, twin sister of Nana Afrakomah II (Queen mother of the Akwamu state). His late father was Kingsley Aboagye Owiredu, from Anum a neighboring traditional area in the eastern region. His Royal Majesty Odeneho Kwafo Akoto III, has three siblings. Prince Amoako Atta (Florida, USA), Princess Phyllis Aboagye Owiredu (Accra, Ghana) and Prince Samuel Aboagye Owiredu (New York City, USA).
His Royal Majesty Odeneho Kwafo Akoto III is married to Lady (Obaapa) Adwoa Kwafo Akoto with six children. Lady (Obaapa) Adwoa Kwafo Akoto formerly known as Adwoa Kyerewa Amponsah attended the University of Ghana Legon and holds a bachelor's degree in Geography and Philosophy, and an MBA Marketing option from Ghana Institute of Management and Public Administration.


== Titles and styles ==
11 April 1967 – 10 February 2011: His Royal Highness Prince Bernard Aboagye Owiredu of Akwamu state
11 February 2011 – present: His Majesty The Akwamuhene (King) of the Kingdom of Akwamu


== Education ==
This young Akwamu royal attained his formal education at the Kwaku Boateng Experimental School in Koforidua. His Father later moved him to Anum Presbyterian Boys Boarding Continuation School for a tougher and discipline Presbyterian upbringing. He continued at the Anum Presbyterian Secondary School where he attained his "GCE" ordinary level certificate. Also, he attended Tema Secondary School where he obtained his "GCE" Advance level certificate. He then travelled to the United States where he obtained a Bachelor of Science degree in Health Service Administration. Upon his arrival in Ghana, he worked as a Health Services Administrator at the Seaport city hospital, Tema General Hospital. He continued his education by pursuing a Master of Business Administration (Project Management Option) at the University of Ghana Business School. While working at Tema General Hospital, he was called to his royal duty to succeed his grand uncle, the late Odeneho Kwafo Akoto ll, and to administer his service to his people by rejuvenating the Akwamu spirit (The sleeping giant of Ghana History).


== Official duties ==


== Succession ==
History indicates that the Akwamuhene and Dormaahene were twin brothers who were both at Akwamu. However, the two got separated after the death of the Great King Ansa Sasraku about 400 years ago when there was the need to install one of them as the next king. According to history, the kingmakers were divided over who should succeed the king. Some preferred the elder brother while others favoured the younger one. And in order to avoid any conflict, the younger one, the Dormaahene, moved out of Akwamu with his supporters and journeyed through various parts of the country and finally settled at present day Dormaa Ahenkro.
The first President of Ghana, Dr Kwame Nkrumah tried to broker peace between the two traditional areas.
During the Nkrumah-powered reunification process which brought the two states together, the Akwamuhene by then, Odeneho Kwafo Akoto II and then Dormaahene, Nana Dr Agyemang Badu I, made a treaty in 1960 to inter-marry so as to keep their blood ties. The Queen mother of the Akwamu nominates Akwamu traditional Rulers based on his royal lineage.[1]


== Akwamu regal list ==


== References ==