Ambalal Sarabhai (24 March 1890 – 1967) was an Indian industrialist in Ahmedabad. He also participated in India's independence movements. Sarabhai was founder of Sarabhai group of Companies, like Sarabhai Textiles, Calico Textile Mills, Sarabhai Chemicals & others.


== Life ==
He was born on 24 March 1890 to Maganlal Karmchand Sarabhai and Godavariba.
He was educated at Gujarat College in Ahmedabad and joined his family business as the director of Karamchand Premchand Private Ltd. He was the owner of Sarabhai Chemicals in Vadodara which manufactured chemicals and pharmaceuticals. He was the president of the Ahmedabad Mill Owner's Association in the year 1918-1920 and also a member of the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation. He was awarded the Kaisar-I-Hind Gold Medal by the British government which he renounced. He gave both personal and financial support to the freedom struggle in Ahmedabad.Ambalal Sarabhai had been ardent supporter of Mahatma Gandhi and Indian independence movement since 1916, when even Gandhi had not yet even launched any big movement in India. Gandhi's Sabarmati Ashram was saved by him with generous donation when that was running in extinction.He married Saraladevi in 1910 and fathered eight children; five daughters and three sons. One of his sons, Vikram Sarabhai, became a physicist and was considered to be the father of the Indian space program. His eldest daughter, Mridula Sarabhai played a leading role in India's freedom struggle. His another daughter Leena Sarabhai established Shreyas Foundation meant for educating orphans and underprivileged kids. His another son Gautam Sarabhai was an industrialist.


== Philanthropy ==
Ambalal Sarabhai Foundation, a trust founded by him runs a noted hospital at Race Course Road in Vadodara. Also Ambalal Sarabhai Foundation for Health, Education & Welfare and Ambalal Sarabhai Trust are other two major charitable trusts, founded by him and looked after by his descendants, which run many schools, hospitals, charitable dispensaries and other welfare activities in Ahmabdabad and other cities of Gujarat.


== See also ==
Sarabhai family
Vikram Sarabhai


== References ==
Basu, Aparna. "Sarabhai family". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/96939. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)


== Notes ==