The anti-independence is a militant movement on a regional level against the  independence of their community and therefore for the maintenance of territorial integrity of State to which the latter is attached. The existence of such movements can only be explained by the presence, in these territories, of strong independence or  secessionist claims.


== Terminology ==
The terms anti-independence and loyalty are generally synonymous, the second term being used mostly in New Caledonia.
The separatist movements generally describe their opponents as  neo-colonialists, whereas it is not uncommon for anti-independenceists to still defend the theses  autonomists,  regionalist or  federalists.
In the provinces of the  Federal States which have  secessionist movements, such as Quebec in Canada, opponents of independence are called " federalists" in the sense that they defend the maintenance of the federal constitution, and that they are  autonomists (for strengthening powers at the local level to the detriment of the federal level ) or not.
In a unitary state, anti-independence movements, also called  republicans or  monarchists depending on the nature of the central state, can be distinguished between centralism centralist (also called  Jacobins in France or  Unionists in United Kingdom, they fight to give none or very little specific political, economic or cultural territory), "departmental" (movement especially present in the French overseas collectivity of Mayotte, aiming to make this territory a  Department and thus lose some of its autonomy) or  autonomists.
Anti-independence can thus include various political ideologies, and can be seen as a form of nationalism defending the unity of an already existing nation, considered synonymous with State sovereign strong and "human group constituting a political community, established on a defined territory (...) and personified by a sovereign authority" ( Le Petit Robert). Independence is also a nationalism but under its cultural and / or ethnic acceptance, with a nation yet to be built and whose ultimate outcome must be political independence, and seen as a "group of people living on a common territory, conscious of its unity (historical, cultural, etc.) and constituting a political entity  "(Dictionary of the French language).
However, in a wider acceptance, it is an opposition to any form of political fragmentation of the world and therefore to nationalism in all its forms, and is found in particular in globalism.
Anti-independence movements can be defended in turn, depending on the local political context, national parties that can go from the extreme right to the far left through all possible political trends.


== Anti-political independence in the world ==


== References ==