"Be With You" ("Sólo me importas tú" in Spanish countries) is a song performed by Spanish singer Enrique Iglesias. It was co-written by Iglesias and produced by Mark Taylor and Brian Rawling, the team responsible for Cher's hit song "Believe". Iglesias once stated that he initially came up with the lyrics of the song while taking a break from recording in London's Hyde Park.
The song was released as the third single from Iglesias's debut English studio album, Enrique, in 1999. It became Iglesias's second number-one single on the US Billboard Hot 100 and received a Grammy nomination for Best Dance Recording in 2001. It was also successful internationally, reaching number two in Canada, number three in Hungary, number four in Spain and the top 20 in Finland, Germany, Italy, New Zealand and Sweden. It is certified Gold in Sweden for shipments of over 15,000.


== Composition ==
The song is performed in the key of C♯ minor with a tempo of 122 beats per minute. In common time, it follows a chord progression of E–B–C♯m–G♯m in the verses and A–B–C♯m–G♯m in the intro and chorus. Iglesias's vocals span from E4 to C♯6.


== Commercial performances ==
"Be with You" was a moderated hit worldwide. In the United States it was a massive hit and became Iglesias's second number-one single there after "Bailamos", claiming the top spot for three consecutive weeks and becoming Iglesias's best-performing single in the US to date. It also topped the Billboard Dance Club Songs chart and also charted in the top twenty in Canada, Finland, Germany, Italy, New Zealand, Spain and Sweden. The Spanish version of the song ("Sólo me importas tú") reached peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart.


== Music videos ==
The official music video for this single was directed by Dave Meyers and starts out with Iglesias and a bunch of friends (played by Iglesias's real life friends including Gerardo Mejía) stopping at a road side store. While messing around in the store Iglesias makes eye contact with the shy girl working the counter, his love interest in the video (played by Shannon Elizabeth). When the group leaves the store, Iglesias drives their jeep while the others perform various stunts including car surfing and interacting with young women in another jeep riding beside them. 
The group stops at a foot of Vasquez Rocks where Iglesias notices Elizabeth, now wearing more provocative clothes and with a lot more confidence; he and the group follow her to a Nightclub (the now closed Point Night Club in Los Angeles) where Iglesias searches the packed dance floor for his love interest when the music stops and changes to that of the popular Thunderpuss 2000 remix which builds up with shots of break dancers until the music turns back to the album version of the song. Iglesias manage to find Elizabeth who gropes him and leads him out of the club. Outside, the two kiss as fireworks go off. The entire video is intercut with shots of Iglesias singing in front of a tribal background.
The video debuted on MTV's Total Request Live in February 2000. It was Iglesias's first video to make it to number one on the popular chart show. Some airing of the video on MTV cut out the section of the video featuring the Thunderpuss 2000 remix. Music stations such as Much Music and various stations throughout Europe aired a version which featured the full album version of the song.
The Spanish version of the video is exactly the same as the English version, with the exception of Iglesias mouthing the words in Spanish in front of the tribal background and when he interacts with Elizabeth.


== Track listings ==
German CD
"Be with You" (Album Version)
"Be with You" (Thunderpuss 2000 Radio Mix)
"Be with You" (Fernando Garibay's Club Mix)"Rhythm Divine" video (CD-ROM extra)US CD
"Be with You" (LP version) — 3:39
"Sólo me importas tú" ("Be with You" Spanish Version) — 3:39US vinyl
"Be with You" (Thunderpuss Club Mix) — 8:16
"Be with You" (Thunderdub) — 8:16
"Be with You" (Mijangos Club Mix) — 8:52
"Be with You" (Mijangos Recycled Dub) — 7:16


== Charts and certifications ==


== See also ==
List of number-one dance singles of 2000 (U.S.)
List of number-one hits (United States)


== References ==


== External links ==
Lyrics of this song at MetroLyrics