Café Coffee Day (CCD) is an Indian café chain. It is a subsidiary of Coffee Day Enterprises Limited. Coffee Day serves 1.8 billion cups of coffee annually in six countries.


== History ==
Café Coffee Day Global Limited Company is a Chikkamagaluru-based business which grows coffee in its own estates of 20,000 acres. It is the largest producer of arabica beans in Asia, exporting to various countries including the U.S., Europe, and Japan.V. G. Siddhartha started the café chain in 1996 when he incorporated Coffee Day Global, which is the parent of the Coffee Day chain. The first CCD outlet was set up on July 11, 1996, at Brigade Road, Bangalore, Karnataka. It rapidly expanded to other cities in India, with more than 1000 cafés open across the nation by 2011.
In 2010, it was announced that a consortium led by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts would invest ₹10 billion (US$140 million) in Coffee Day Resorts, owned by the company. The same year, the logo was changed to the current logo, which the company stated was to showcase the chain as a place to talk. This was done with major changes in the layout of the stores, including the addition of lounges and a total revamp of the interiors.

		
		
		
The company is vertically integrated as per the strategy to cut costs: from owning the plantations to growing the coffee, making the coffee machines and making the furniture for the outlets.On 29 July 2019, Siddhartha went missing, and his body was found in the Nethravathi river backwaters two days later. A letter, assumed to be written by Siddhartha addressing the board of directors and staff, was made public in which he takes responsibility for not creating a profitable business model.In September 2019, the company appointed auditing firm Ernst and Young to scrutinize their books of accounts. They also indicated the auditor will also look into circumstances of the last letter written by the founder and the points he made in it.In March 2020, Coffee Day Enterprises Limited announced that it has reached an agreement to sell Global Village Technology Park, a 90-acre tech park on the outskirts of Bengaluru, for a total consideration of ₹ 27 billion for repaying the debt of Cafe Coffee Day’s associate firms and their promoters.


== Outlets ==
As of 2018, the company had 1,722 café outlets in over 200 cities of India. Cafe Coffee Day has also expanded outside India with its outlets in Austria (Vienna), Czech Republic, Egypt and Nepal.

		
		
		


== Subsidiaries ==
In June 2010, CCD acquired Café Emporio, a café chain from the Czech Republic. Café Emporio has 11 cafés in the Czech Republic. 7 of them are in Prague, 1 is in Brno and Olomouc and 2 are at Freeport-Hate.
Café Coffee Day's divisions include:

Coffee Day Fresh 'n' Ground, which owns 450 coffee bean and powder retail outlets
Coffee Day Square, a high-level coffee bar in Bangalore, Kolkata, Chennai, Mumbai and New Delhi
Coffee Day Xpress, which runs 900+ Coffee Day kiosks
Coffee Day Beverages, which runs over 50,000 vending machines
Coffee Day Exports, its exporting wing
Coffee Day Perfect, its fast-moving consumer goods packaged coffee division
Coffee Day B2C Plant, coffee vending machine manufacturing division


== See also ==
List of coffeehouse chains
Tata Starbucks


== Footnotes ==


== External links ==
Official website
India's first wireless cyber cafe opened