"Candy" is a song recorded by American rapper Foxy Brown for her third studio album Broken Silence (2001). It was written by Brown and its producers The Neptunes. Def Jam released the song as the album's third single on August 21, 2001. "Candy" is a dance-pop, pop, and R&B song with new wave and 1980s music influences. American singer Kelis performs the hook while Brown raps the verses. The lyrics about cunnilingus; critics noted that its sexual content contrasted with Broken Silence's focus on more introspective topics.
The song was well received during its release and in retrospective reviews; critics compared it to music by other artists, including Lil' Kim. Its depiction of black female sexuality attracted attention from academic scholars. The song peaked at number 24 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Billboard chart. It was featured on featured on soundtracks in the early 2000s, and was played on the television show Dark Angel and the films Friday After Next and The 40-Year-Old Virgin.


== Production and release ==

The Neptunes produced two songs—"Candy" and "Gangsta Boogie"—for Foxy Brown's third studio album Broken Silence (2001). They co-wrote it with Brown who is credited under her legal name Inga Marchand. According to Billboard's Colin Finan, The Neptunes were so prolific in 2001 that they had "laced nearly every R&B/hip-hop hit" released that summer. "Candy" features vocals by Kelis, a frequent collaborator with the Neptunes. Music journalist Peter Shapiro wrote that Kelis had become their "diva of choice" to sing hooks on other artists' songs and noted the diversity of her work mentioning her contributions to music "for everyone from Foxy Brown to Noreaga". "Candy" was recorded at the Master Sound Recording Studios in Virginia Beach. The vocals were recorded by David Hummel and Erik Steinert and mixed by Axel Niehaus at Avatar Studios in New York City.The song debuted at the Broken Silence listening party held in New York City in June 2001. It was one of several songs, including "A Letter" and "Oh Yeah", played at the event. Def Jam released "Candy" in the US as the album's third single on August 21, 2001, and PolyGram promoted it in the UK in 2002. The song was issued as a 12-inch single and a CD single; the 12-inch single included the song's radio edit and instrumental and "730", a track from Broken Silence, as its b-side.  Elektra produced a pink vinyl record in a limited edition. To promote "Candy", Brown performed a portion of it in the music video for her single "Tables Will Turn".Following its release, "Candy" was often featured on early 2000s soundtracks, appearing in the films Friday After Next (2002) and The 40-Year-Old Virgin (2005). Along with its inclusion on the 2002 soundtrack for the television show Dark Angel, it was also played in the season two episode "Some Assembly Required". The song was a part of the 2003 compilation album XXX Hip Hop. AllMusic's Tim Sendra wrote that "Candy", along with Lil' Kim's "Suck My Dick" and Khia's "My Neck, My Back (Lick It)", represented the "nasty females" on the album.


== Music and lyrics ==
Brown adopted a "more pop-influenced" sound for "Candy" compared to that of her previous albums, and HipHopDX's Nomatazele further defined its style as dance-pop. In MTV News, Shaheem Reid characterized the song as a "sugary party track". While writer Anthony J. Fonseca described "Candy" as a dance song with a pop refrain, Colin Finan reviewed it as part of Billboard's R&B category. The song includes influences from new wave music and 1980s music. The instrumental includes a Spanish guitar, and is built on a staccato beat frequently used by The Neptunes. Brown raps the verses "aggressively" over a mid-tempo beat. Finan likened her voice to a "sexy, husky boom", and considered Kelis, who sings the hook, to have a more "high-pitched, childlike sound"."Candy" is about cunnilingus, as represented in lyrics like "Let me know when you're ready to eat". Finan summed the song up as "an ode to oral sex". Based on this content, reviewers have likened the track to a "musical striptease" in which Brown boasts of her "sexual prowess" with a "graphic description of her bedroom capabilities". Although Broken Silence has a larger focus on introspective subject matters, such as "The Letter", about a suicide attempt, critics noted it still featured sexually explicit songs, like "Candy", as had been the case on Brown's past albums. While discussing this difference in style, The Guardian's Caroline Sullivan clarified: "But the sexually provocative Foxy of old isn't completely extinct."Multiculturalism professor Nichole A. Guillory wrote that Brown acts as stewardess by guiding a man to examine different parts of her body, like her breasts and dark skin, while boasting she tastes "just like candy". The lyrics, "Licking my lips / And adjusting my tits and switching my hips", focus on Brown's body and her attempt to stimulate the man's interest. Although she invites this anonymous male subject to have sex with lyrics like "imagine me nude, stretched out" and "nipples all out, bent over the sink", she also warns him: "When I lay on my stomach and throw my legs back / Y'all niggaz won't know how to act." In the third verse, Brown takes on more "sexual agency" as she raps about being on top and her self-worth.
I'm real sweet like a candy corn..."Picture me, t-shirt, no panties on...I'm priceless boy"


== Reception ==


=== Critical reception ===

"Candy" received a positive response from critics, several of whom cited it as a highlight of Broken Silence, including Village Voice critic Robert Christgau, Steve Jones for the Gannett News Service, and the Associated Press' Latrice Davis. In a review for The Dallas Morning News, Rob Clark praised the song as "undeniably catchy". Writing for Spin, Joshua Clover described "Candy" as a "strange brew of threatening, hooky, sexy, creepy, and overwhelming" vocals, and wrote that the Neptunes represented Brown's "discreet charm". In Billboard, Colin Finan said the production complimented Brown and Kelis' voices, however, he questioned the song's appeal to some audiences, specifically those of conservative radio stations, due to its sexual content. In a negative review for the Phoenix New Times, Bret McCabe criticized Brown for not having a strong enough voice for R&B and soul music.Retrospective reviews of "Candy" have been positive. In a 2012 article for The Boombox, Nadine Graham said the song was "sugary sweet, poppy cut". HipHopDX's Dana Scott named Broken Silence one of the top twenty best albums by a female rapper, citing "Candy" as a "pop-worthy earworm" that helped to "to lighten up the showcase". Fuse's Jeff Benjamin included the song on his 2014 Spotify playlist of the best female collaborations. Praising "Candy" as one of Kelis' top ten collaborations in a 2017 article for The Fader, Patrick D. McDermott said that its hook was "stone-cold classic Kelis" and "unshakeable, and lightyears ahead of its time". Mark Marymont, writing for The News-Press, also enjoyed Kelis' contributions to "Candy", and believed she sounded better on duets since she had "sometimes thin, even whiny vocals".Reviewers have compared "Candy" to music by other artists, including Lil' Kim. Gender studies scholars Jennifer Esposito and Bettina Love likened the song's candy metaphor to Lil' Kim's "Kitty Box" from her 2005 album The Naked Truth, while a contributor for The Dallas Morning News said "Candy" was not as provocative as Lil' Kim's music. In a review of Macy Gray's 2001 album The Id, The Washington Post's Arion Berger wrote that the song "Harry" was a "sexual boast as bold as" Brown's single "Candy", which he described as "supremely nasty". Author Roni Sarig praised the Neptune's production on "Candy", Beyoncé's "Work It Out", and Common's "I Got a Right Ta" as a "combination of classical soul, blues, and pop bundled with twenty-first century digital mayhem".


=== Racial analysis ===
"Candy" has also been the subject of some scholarly analysis. According to scholar Doyinsola Faluyi, Brown's appearance on the song's cover represents how some black female rappers focused on their sexuality. This was in contrast to artists like Da Brat who modeled themselves after "the dominant fashion in male hip-hop culture" with a more masculine style. The lyrics were discussed by Jennifer Esposito and Bettina Love who believed Brown's boasts about being the dominant partner during sex combated psychologist Michelle Fine's theories on "sexuality as victimization". Brown's explicit demands for oral sex throughout the song serves to challenge negative cultural attitudes about sexually active women "mak[ing] it clear that women can desire sex and can ask for pleasure".Nichole A. Guillory criticized "Candy" as a sexual fantasy that objectifies a black woman's body to appeal to a male gaze, writing that its lyrics present black women as "territories to be penetrated, occupied and ravaged by men". Guillory noted Brown demonstrates some agency when she brags about being priceless and skilled as a top. Although she felt this moment was not strong enough to undo the overall objectification present in the lyrics, she acknowledged it as "an important reminder of the ongoing struggle between black women and men for control of black women's bodies". In another critical analysis of the song, Esposito and Love questioned if Brown was promoting further the idea that "bad girls are used sexually by men, while good girls are the ones men want to marry".


== Commercial performance ==
"Candy" debuted at number 24 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Billboard chart on September 15, 2001. It also peaked at number 48 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs Billboard chart and number 10 on the Hot Rap Songs Billboard chart in September 2001. While discussing the song's commercial performance, The Boombox's Nadine Graham said it was hated by "the streets" and it had "struggled its way up" the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart.


== Track listing ==


== Credits and personnel ==
Credits adapted from the liner notes of Broken Silence.Recording locations

Master Sound Recording Studios (Virginia Beach)
Avatar Studios (New York City)Personnel


== Charts ==


== References ==


=== Footnotes ===


=== Citations ===


== External links ==
Lyrics of this song at MetroLyrics