The Center for Climate and Energy Solutions (C2ES) is an environmental nonprofit organization based in Arlington, Virginia. Launched in 2011, C2ES is the successor to the Pew Center on Global Climate Change. C2ES works closely with policymakers and stakeholders to promote pragmatic, effective policies at the state, national and international levels.


== Leadership ==
Bob Perciasepe, the former deputy administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), became the organization's president in August 2014, succeeding Eileen Claussen, the center's founding president. The chairman of the C2ES board of directors is Theodore Roosevelt IV.


== Strategies ==
C2ES seeks to contribute to the effort to solve climate and energy challenges by:

Providing timely, impartial information and analysis on the scientific, economic, technological and policy dimensions of climate and energy challenges. Examples include resources on carbon pollution standards and on extreme weather and climate change.
Bringing together business, the environmental community, policymakers, and other stakeholders to achieve common understanding and consensus solutions. Examples include collaborative efforts to accelerate the deployment of plug-in electric vehicles and a broad coalition supporting the use of captured carbon dioxide in enhanced oil recovery.
Helping employees and consumers save energy and money and reduce their carbon footprints through its Make an Impact program.Highlighting the broad mix of approaches required to tackle the climate challenge, the Pew Center produced nearly 100 peer-reviewed reports and a broad collection of white papers and briefs by noted climate experts covering a range of critical topics including economics, environmental impacts, policy, science, business, and technology. The Pew Center regularly testified before the United States Congress and met with others to share ideas for addressing climate change. The Pew Center also was engaged with governments and business in exploring options for a post-2012 international climate agreement
The Pew Center's Business Environmental Leadership Council (BELC) became the largest U.S.-based association of companies committed to advancing both policy and business solutions to climate change. The Council started with 13 members and by 2008 included “44 companies with $2.8 trillion in market capitalization, a sizable chunk of the world economy,” according to McClatchy Newspapers.  It now includes more than 30 mainly Fortune 500 companies with combined revenue of $2 trillion and 3.5 million employees. The Council now operates as the C2ES Business Environmental Leadership Council. The Pew Center also served as a founding and active member of the U.S. Climate Action Partnership (USCAP), an influential business-NGO coalition calling on Congress to establish a mandatory national climate policy.
C2ES has also partnered with several companies, including Entergy and Alcoa, for its Make an Impact program, which engages employees and helps individuals take action to reduce their carbon footprints.  
C2ES, and previously the Pew Center on Global Climate Change, have consistently ranked among the world's top environmental think tanks in the Global Go To Think Tank Rankings, a survey of hundreds of scholars and experts conducted by the University of Pennsylvania. 


== See also ==
Low-carbon economy
Climate change policy of the United States


== References ==


== External links ==
Center for Climate and Energy Solutions homepage
Business Environmental Leadership Council