Christmas Songs is the eighth full-length studio album and first Christmas album from Jars of Clay, that was released on October 16, 2007 through Gray Matters/Nettwerk. This is the first ever release from the band through their newly created Gray Matters imprint via Nettwerk Music Group.


== Background ==
In 2006, Jars of Clay began to seek a new recording contract as their then-current contract with Sony BMG's Christian sub-label Essential Records was due to end a few releases later. The group then decided to create their own label named Gray Matters and formed a partnership with the label and imprint label Nettwerk. The group decided to record their first full length Christmas album to debut on this label. The group previously has released one Christmas EP named Drummer Boy, which contained the classic Christmas carol "The Little Drummer Boy". The group also contributed their original Christmas song "Bethlehem Town" to the Christmas edition of the City on a Hill series. In 2004, Jars appeared on the collection entitled Maybe This Christmas Tree with their lighter "Christmas for Cowboys" alongside artists such as Lisa Loeb, Ivy and Copeland. More recently, in 2005, Jars returned to the Christmas classics to cover "It Came Upon a Midnight Clear" on the collection Come Let Us Adore Him: A Christmas Worship Experience.
In 2007 as the contract with Sony BMG ended, the group began recording Christmas Songs, selecting a range of established and well known Christmas Carols, some lesser known songs and some original songs to present for this project. The album was recorded in one-take recording sessions, a recording method only used once before by the band, in their prior studio album Good Monsters. This recording method meant that the majority of the time spent on the album was spent in pre-production, arranging the songs, practicing the songs before entering the studio to record them.


== Track listing ==


== USB Stick Version ==
Christmas Songs was also released via USB stick format. The flash drive is reusable and has a capacity of 512 MB. The USB sticks were initially only available for purchase at concerts, but has since been added to the band's official online store. Each USB stick contains the following:

Christmas Songs album in its entirety (MP3 files at 192 kbit/s bitrate)
Acoustic version of "O Little Town of Bethlehem"
Full-length music video for "Love Came Down at Christmas" (M4V video format)
Readings of "First Breath", "Life As Advent", "The Burden of Hope" and "Who Gets to be Santa" from the book Peace Is Here, written by members of Jars of Clay
Live video performances of "Hibernation Day" and "Drummer Boy" from the Gospel Music Channel's Christmas at Union Station special


== Awards ==
In 2008, the album was nominated for a Dove Award for Christmas Album of the Year at the 39th GMA Dove Awards.


== Credits ==


=== Music ===
Dan Haseltine - vocals
Stephen Mason - guitars, background vocals
Matt Odmark - guitars, background vocals
Charlie Lowell - keyboards, piano, background vocals
Jeremy Lutito - drums, percussion, bells, background vocals, vibes
Gabe Ruschival - bass, keyboards, percussion, bells, background vocals, vibes
John Catchings - cello
Christine Dente - vocals
Tom Howard - horn and string arrangements
Mitch Dane - tambourine
Pam Sisfin - violin
Alan Umstead - violin
Conni Ellisor - violin
Kris Wilkinson - viola
Jim Grosjean - viola
Carole Rabinowitz - cello
Jeff Bailey - trumpet
Jennifer Kummer - French horn
Sam Levine - flute, winds
Gil Long - tuba
Carl Gorodetzky - orchestra contractor


=== Production ===
Jars of Clay - producer
Mitch Dane - recording, engineering, mixing
Vance Powell - recording, engineering
Mike Odmark - assisting to recording and engineering
Joshua Vance Smith - assisting to recording, engineering, and mixing
Mike Paragone - recording assistant
Richard Dodd - mastering
Christie Little - package illustrations and design


== References ==