The Clearing House Interbank Payments System (CHIPS) is a United States private clearing house for large-value transactions.  By 2015 it was settling well over US$1.5 trillion a day in around 250,000 interbank payments in cross border and domestic transactions. Together with the Fedwire Funds Service (which is operated by the Federal Reserve Banks), CHIPS forms the primary U.S. network for large-value domestic and international USD payments where it has a market share of around 96%. CHIPS transfers are governed by Article 4A of Uniform Commercial Code.
Unlike the Fedwire system which is part of a regulatory body, CHIPS is owned by the financial institutions that use it.  For payments that are less time-sensitive in nature, banks typically prefer to use CHIPS instead of Fedwire, as CHIPS is less expensive (both by charges and by funds required).  One of the reasons is that Fedwire is a real-time gross settlement system, while CHIPS allows payments to be netted.


== Differences from Fedwire ==
CHIPS differs from the Fedwire payment system in three key ways. First, it is privately owned, whereas the Fed is part of a regulatory body.  Second, it has 47 member participants (with some merged banks constituting separate participants), compared with  9,289 banking institutions (as of March 19, 2009) eligible to make and receive funds via Fedwire.  Third, it is a netting engine (and hence, not real-time).
A netting engine consolidates all of the pending payments into fewer single transactions. For example, if Bank of America is to pay American Express US$1.2 million, and American Express is to pay Bank of America $800,000, the CHIPS system aggregates this to a single payment of $400,000 from Bank of America to American Express — only 20% of the $2 million to be transferred actually changes hands. The Fedwire system would require two separate payments for the full amounts ($1.2 million to American Express and $800,000 to Bank of America).


== Members ==
CHIPS is owned by the financial institutions. According to the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC), an interagency office of the United States government, "any banking organization with a regulated U.S. presence may become an owner and participate in the network." CHIPS participants may be commercial banks, Edge Act corporations or investment companies. Until 1998, to be a CHIPS participant, a financial institution was required to maintain a branch or an agency in New York City. A non-participant wishing to make international payments using CHIPS was required to employ one of the CHIPS participants to act as its correspondent or agent.


=== List of members ===
As of 2009, the member participants (with country of ownership) are:
ABN AMRO Bank N.V.  Netherlands
American Express Bank Ltd.  United States
Banco Bilbao Vizcaya, S.A.  Spain
Banco de la Nacion Argentina  Argentina
Banco do Brasil S.A.  Brazil
Bangkok Bank Public Company Limited  Thailand
Bank Hapoalim B.M.  Israel
Bank Leumi USA  United States
Bank of America, N.A.  United States
Bank of China  China
Bank of Communications  China
The Bank of New York Mellon  United States
Bank of Nova Scotia  Canada
The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, Ltd.  Japan
Barclays Bank PLC  England
BNP Paribas New York  France
Brown Brothers Harriman & Company  United States
Calyon  France
Citibank, N.A.  United States
Commerzbank AG  Germany
Credit Industriel et Commercial  France
Deutsche Bank AG  Germany
Deutsche Bank Trust Co Americas, formerly Bankers Trust  United States
Dresdner Bank AG  Germany
Habib American Bank  United States
Habib Bank Limited  Pakistan
HSBC Bank USA  United States
Mega International Commercial Bank  Taiwan
Intesa Sanpaolo  Italy
Israel Discount Bank of New York  United States
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.  United States
KBC Bank N.V.  Belgium
Mashreq Bank  United Arab Emirates
M & T Bank  United States
Mitsubishi UFJ Trust and Banking Corporation NY Branch  Japan
Mizuho Corporate Bank - NY  Japan
The National Bank of Kuwait SAK  Kuwait
The Northern Trust Company  United States
The Royal Bank of Scotland  United Kingdom
Société Générale  France
Standard Chartered Bank  England
State Bank of India  India
State Street Bank and Trust Company  United States
Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation  Japan
UBS AG  Switzerland
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association  United States


== See also ==
Clearing (finance)
ACH Network - electronic payment network in the United States
CHAPS - the UK equivalent of CHIPS
Clearing House Association - banking lobby organization
Electronic Payments Network - private sector ACH operator
Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (SWIFT)


== References ==


== External links ==
Fedwire and Clearing House Interbank Payments System Retrieved Nov. 28, 2005.
The Clearing House Interbank Payment System