Esther de Jong (born 16 May 1974)  is a Dutch model, artist and writer.


== Career ==
De Jong was raised in the Netherlands and started her career in the fashion world by chance, when she had to replace the absence of a model who had not arrived for a photo shoot with photographer Anette Aurell, for whom De Jong was working as a  nanny in Paris. The photoshoot was so successful, that she was presented to Marilyn Gauthier, director of the prestigious modeling agency Marilyn Agency, who offered De Jong a contract.Esther de Jong's first experience as a model was for the cover of Vogue Italy, in January 1996 with Steven Meisel. And an exclusive for a Jill Sander runway show in Milan. That kick started Esther her career as a model in a record time. In addition, De Jong has walked for some of the most important international fashion houses such as Alberta Ferretti, Anna Sui, Calvin Klein, Cerruti, Chanel, Chloé, Christian Dior SA, Christian Lacroix, DKNY, Dolce & Gabbana, Fendi, Iceberg, John Galliano, Karl Lagerfeld, Marc Jacobs, Max Mara, Missoni, Miu Miu, Prada, Sonia Rykiel, Sportmax and Vivienne Westwood, Versace, Alexander McQueen, Givenchy, Ann Demeulemeester among others .
De Jong was also the star of the advertising campaigns for Dior, Chanel Cruise, Adrienne Vittadini, Alberta Ferretti, Bazar de Christian Lacroix, Bloomingdale's, Celine, Cerruti 1881, Chanel, Christian Dior lunetes, Clinique Happy, DKNY, Gianfranco Ferre, Guerlain, Hermes, Nicole Farhi, Prada, Cavalli, Rochas, Saks Fifth Avenue and Sonia Rykiel. Thanks to these experiences De Jong has had the opportunity to work with photographers such as Steven Meisel and Nick Knight among the many amazing talents in fashion.
Since 2003, following the birth of her son Oscar, Esther has gradually reduced her appearances on the catwalks. Until recently, the 125-year anniversary of Lanvin, and Prada in 2013.
Currently, Esther is happily breeding Thoroughbred horses on her farm and participating in independent film projects and being a loving mother to her son Oscar.
Esther De Jong is currently represented by The Model CoOp in New York City and IMG in Paris.


== Charitable organizations ==
In 2004, De Jong founded the Home & Life Orphanage Foundation after the passing of her model agent and friend, Sam and her baby in the 2004 tsunami.De Jong is also a major supporter of the OAfrica organization which was established in 2002 and works towards helping orphans in Africa.
She also a volunteer for CASA Lexington.


== References ==