Garrett (or Gerald)  Dillon (c.1640-c.1696) was an Irish judge, politician and soldier, who  held  the office of Recorder of Dublin. He is  mainly remembered today  as one of the signatories of the Treaty of Limerick, which he  helped to negotiate. The refusal of the English Crown to abide by the terms of the Treaty led to his downfall. He fled abroad and  died in exile in France.


== Background ==
He was born in County Westmeath, the  son of Theobald Dillon of Portlick Castle and his wife Marcella Browne. Theobald was the son of Garrett Dillon of Feamore, County Mayo, who was a cousin of Theobald Dillon, 1st Viscount Dillon.  The younger Garrett inherited both Feamore and Portlick, and acquired other estates in Westmeath and Mayo. All  his estates were forfeited in the 1690s. His eldest son Theobald recovered  some of the family estates, but  not Portlick Castle,  which passed to the Smyth family, who lived there until 1955.


== Career ==
He entered Gray's Inn in 1669, and was called to the Irish Bar  in 1674. The  Roman Catholic King James II of England, who succeeded to the throne  in 1685, adopted  a  policy of appointing as many Catholics as possible to high office. Dillon was described as a "furious (i.e. passionate)  Catholic" and was in favour with  the King. His rise  to high office was rapid: he became King's Counsel and Recorder of Dublin in 1685, and  Prime Serjeant  in 1687. In the so-called Patriot Parliament  of 1689 he sat in the Irish House of Commons  as member for Mullingar. On the outbreak of the Williamite War, he entered the military service on King James's side and was made a colonel.


== The Treaty of Limerick and afterwards ==
After the defeat of the Jacobite cause, the new King William III of England  was anxious to conciliate as many of his former opponents as possible. One  result of this policy  was the negotiation of the  Treaty of Limerick, which was strictly speaking two treaties, one  military and one  civil. Dillon (who had been dismissed from all his  political  offices) was one of the  three lawyers, the others being John Brown and Sir Toby Butler, who negotiated the civil articles  on behalf of the defeated Jacobite side, although Butler is believed  to have done most of the hard  work.
The Treaty articles were signed by Dillon and his colleagues on 3 October 1691. The  terms were surprisingly generous to the defeated side. In particular the Treaty provided that those Jacobites who swore an oath of loyalty to the new regime who be permitted to retain their lands. Unfortunately for the Jacobites, the Parliament of Ireland was not prepared to abide by the terms of the Treaty, which it regarded as far too generous to the Jacobites.After months of acrimonious  debate,  Parliament was prorogued without a vote on the Treaty,  and it was never ratified. Life for Catholics who had supported King James became increasingly difficult: while his co-signatories, Butler and Brown, were left in peace, Dillon was proscribed and left the country. He joined King James in France, and became a colonel in his regiment in 1693. He died a few years later, greatly mourned, according to Burke, as a man of "integrity, eloquence, learning and worth".


== Family ==
Dillon married firstly  in 1677  Susanna Clifford, daughter of Thomas Clifford, and widow of Sir Edward Crofton, first of the Crofton Baronets of the Mote, County Roscommon (who had died  in 1675). Dillon and  Susanna  had no children, although Susanna had at least one son,  Edward,  from her first marriage, who succeeded his father as second Baronet.
Sir Edward and his stepfather were political opponents, and perhaps also  personal enemies, and Susanna's death sometime before 1689 broke the  family tie between the two men. Edward was a convinced supporter of the Glorious Revolution, and no doubt for that reason the Patriot Parliament, of which Dillon was a prominent member, attainted him. After the downfall of the Jacobite cause, Edward  quickly recovered his lands and went on to have  a successful political career. There is no reason to think that he made any move to help his stepfather,  nor  perhaps  could Dillon,  after his  own conduct in the Patriot Parliament,  have expected any favours from Edward.
Dillon married secondly, before 1690, Mary Hamilton,  posthumous daughter of George Hamilton, 4th Baron Hamilton of Strabane by  his wife Elizabeth Fagan, by whom he had several children, including Theobald, his  eldest son and heir, who managed to recover at least part of the family estate.


== References ==
Burke, Oliver (1885), Anecdotes of the Connaught Circuit, Dublin: Hodges
Crofton, Francis  The Story of Mote  1895
Kenny, Colum  The King's Inns and the Kingdom of Ireland  Irish Academic Press  Dublin 1992
Hart, A.R.  History of the King's Serjeant-at-law in Ireland  Four Courts Press Dublin 2000
Lodge, John and Archdall, Mervyn  Peerage of Ireland Dublin 1789