The Humane Order of African Redemption, an order presented by the government of Liberia, was founded on January 13, 1879 during the presidency of Anthony W. Gardiner. It is awarded for humanitarian work in Liberia, for acts supporting and assisting the Liberian nation and to individuals who have played a prominent role in the emancipation of African Americans and the pursuit of equal rights. 
The Order replaced the older Liberian "Lone Star Medal". 
The three grades of the Order are:
* Grand Commander: The Grand Commander wears a wide ribbon on the right shoulder and the star of the Order on the left. 
* Knight Commander: The Knight Commander, wears a ribbon around the neck and a smaller but otherwise identical star. George Thomas Reffell was Knight Commander of the Humane Order of African Redemption (Liberia). Born 3 June 1864. Died 28 September 1934.
* Officer: The Officer wears a narrow ribbon with rosette on the left.


== The Regalia of the Order ==
The medallion is a white enamel five pointed star with five gold balls on the points and golden rays between the arms. On the front of the star is the Coat of Arms of Liberia. On the reverse, the image of black people praying with broken chains under a cross with the motto "The love of liberty brought us here". The ribbon is red with one blue and three white stripes.


== Members ==
Edward Wilmot Blyden
Anna E. Cooper
George Thomas Reffell
A. Doris Banks Henries
Marian Anderson
William Franklin Graham Jr. 
David Meserve Thomas
Asa Grant Hilliard
Gordon Mellish, missionary with Baptist Mid-Missions
James Walter Flemister
George Toe Washington
Varney Ebrima Dempster
Francis Gbassagee
Solomon Sipply
Ijoma Robert Flemister
Francois Eugene Massaquoi
Jacques Paul Klein
Sepp Blatter
Ellen Margrethe Løj
Alex J. Tyler
Cletus Wotorson
Dougbeh Chris Nyan
Arsène Wenger


== References ==


== External links ==
Humane Order of African Redemption, Officer
ODM of Liberia: Order of African Redemption
Order of African Redemption, Commander - The OMSA Medal Database