The IEEE Education Society (EdSoc) is a society of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) that is focused on the theory and practice of education and educational technology needed to deliver effectively domain knowledge in the fields of interest of IEEE.  The society is an international organization concerned with state-of-the-art information and resources related to engineering education and with professional development within academia and industry.  Membership is open to professionals in an IEEE-designated field as evidenced by educational background or by experience as well as to students who are pursuing undergraduate or graduate education in an IEEE-related field.


== History ==
The IEEE Education Society was formed on 14 June 1957 as the Professional Group on Education (PGE) of the Institute of Radio Engineers (IRE). (The IRE and the American Institute of Electrical Engineers (AIEE) merged to form IEEE in 1963.) The founder and first chairman of IRE-PGE was John D. Ryder, a past president of the IRE. After several name changes, IEEE Professional Technical Group on Education (1963), IEEE Professional Group on Education (1965), and IEEE Education Group (1966), the Society became the IEEE Education Society on 22 October 1978.The society has members and chapters globally. In addition to its publications, conferences, and awards activities, the society and its chapters sponsor professional development events such as Distinguished Lecturer Programs. It collaborates with other bodies, inside and outside of IEEE, with shared interests such as complementary awards with the IEEE Educational Activities Board, the ASEE Electrical and Computer Engineering Division, and IEEE-Eta Kappa Nu.


== Publications and standards ==

The IEEE Education Society publishes and co-publishes a range of publications within its field of interests. IEEE Xplore provides online access to these publications.
IEEE Transactions on Education (ToE)
IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies (TLT)
IEEE-RITA (Latin-American Learning Technologies Journal)The IEEE Education Society was the sponsoring society for the following IEEE standard.
IEEE Standard for Networked Smart Learning Objects for Online Laboratories, IEEE Std 1876–2019.


== Conferences ==
The IEEE Education Society sponsors and co-sponsors conferences annually.  It has five premier conferences in engineering education.

Frontiers in Education Conference, an international conference on electrical and computer education dating to 1971.
EDUCON, IEEE- Global Engineering Education Conference, held in Europe/Middle East/Africa locations dating to 2010
TALE, IEEE International Conference on Teaching, Assessment, and Learning for Engineering, held in Asia/Pacific locations dating to 2012
EDUNINE, IEEE World Engineering Education Conference, held in Latin America locations dating to 2017
LWMOOCS, Learning with MOOCS, dating to 2014


== Awards ==
The IEEE Education Society has an annual awards program to recognize accomplishment related to its mission and activities. The award categories are shown below.

William E. Sayle II Award for Achievement in Education
Edwin C. Jones, Jr. Meritorious Service Award
Distinguished Member Award
Student Leadership Award
Mac Van Valkenburg Early Career Teaching Award
Harriett B. Rigas Award (for Faculty Women)
Distinguished Chapter Leadership Award
Chapter Achievement Award
IEEE Transactions on Education Theodore E. Batchman Best Paper AwardThe Frontiers in Education (FIE) Conference also presents the following annual awards.

Benjamin Dasher Best Paper Award
Helen Plants Award (For Best Non-Traditional Session)
Ronald J. Schmitz Award (For Service to the FIE Conference)These awards are typically presented at the Frontiers in Education (FIE) Conference and are published in the IEEE Transactions on Education.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website