Jaci Stephen (born 1958) is a Welsh journalist, broadcaster, actress and writer. She is best known as a newspaper columnist and television critic for the London Evening Standard, the Daily Mirror, Daily Mail and The Mail on Sunday.


== Early life ==
She was born in Wales and attended Durham Road Junior School in Newport, Monmouthshire, Brynteg Comprehensive secondary school (Ysgol Brynteg) in Bridgend  and Cardiff University where she gained a B.A. (Hons) degree in English and a Post Graduate Certificate in Education. She received a Master's Degree in Creative Writing from the University of Lancaster. 


== Career ==
She became an English teacher and then a full-time writer after her MA, for which she completed her first published novel (Hutchinson 1990), Definitions of a Horse. Since the 1980s she has written articles for numerous newspapers and magazines including:
The Times, The Sunday Times, The Daily Telegraph, The Guardian, The Independent, The Times Literary Supplement, Marie Claire and Cosmopolitan. She currently writes 'Soapwatch - The ultimate insight into this week's soaps'; a review of soap operas for the Daily Mail Weekend magazine.She has made several television appearances, including seven years as Soap Critic (and a year on film) on This Morning and in 2002 presenting the ITV lifestyle and chat show Loose Women. She presented her own series, Star Suppers (UK Food) and Guess Who's Coming to Dinner (ITV Wales), her own interview format in which celebrities cooked for her and shared stories over drinks and a meal. In 2009, she was featured in the series The Secret of My Success (ITV Wales). In 1984 she won the Catherine Pakenham Award for young female journalists and in 1990 was named Broadcasting Writer of the Year in the What the Papers Say Awards. Her blog LA Not So Confidential has won the award for Satire/Humor writing (across all platforms) in both the Southern California Journalism Awards and the National Arts and Entertainment Journalism Awards (US).


== References ==


== External links ==
Articles by Jaci Stephen from the Mail Online.

Jaci Stephen on IMDb