Jason Pinter (born November 10, 1979) is an American author known for his thriller novels.


== Biography ==
Before becoming a writer, he worked for Warner Books, Random House, and St. Martin's Press as a book editor. He was signed to write multiple novels in his Henry Parker series almost immediately after having his first book published. Pinter has stated that he wishes to continue writing as many Henry Parker novels as possible given that Henry has "many stories left to tell". He also published the political thriller novel The Castle.
He is the author of a humorous adventure novel for young readers Zeke Bartholomew: Superspy!. Pinter has also worked as a columnist for the Huffington Post.As of 2013, he is the Founder and Publisher of Polis Books, an independent publishing company.
Pinter lives in New York City. He received his undergraduate degree from Wesleyan University.


== Henry Parker series ==
The Mark
Pinter's debut novel - and the first Henry Parker novel - The Mark (2007) features young journalist Henry Parker's attempt to prove his innocence of the murder of a New York City police officer. The Mark has been optioned to be a feature film. It was named one of the best mysteries of 2007 by Strand Magazine and nominated for the RT Booklovers Reviewers Choice award for Best First Mystery, the Strand Critics award for Best First Novel, and the Barry Award for Best Paperback Original.The Guilty
In the second Henry Parker novel, The Guilty (2008, March), Henry tries to track down a serial killer terrorizing New York City, who uses an antique Winchester rifle.The Stolen
In the third Henry Parker novel, Henry interviews a boy who reappears five years after being kidnapped, with no recollection of his missing years. Against pressure from the community and the boy's parents, Henry investigates the strange circumstances surrounding the boy's disappearance. The Stolen (2008, August) was named one of the best mysteries of 2008 by Strand Magazine and nominated for the Shamus Award for Best Paperback Original and the CrimeSpree award for Best Paperback Original.The Fury
In the fourth Henry Parker novel, Henry must track down his brother's killer, who may or may not have ties to a long-dormant drug kingpin. The Fury (2009, October) was named one of the best mysteries of 2009 by Strand Magazine.The Hunters: A Novella
In November 2009 Pinter released a Henry Parker novella, The Hunters as a free e-book.  Henry Parker, having closed a harrowing week, and Jack O'Donnell, "fresh out of rehab", must track down two "brutal, calculating" killers.The Darkness
In the fifth Henry Parker book, The Darkness (2009, November 24), a young man is found beaten to death, his body dumped into New York's East River, and Henry suspects the victim has ties to his murdered brother.


== Zeke Bartholomew: SuperSpy ==
A humorous spy novel for Middle Grade readers, published by Sourcebooks in 2011. "The beginning pulls the reader in and keeps him hooked with action-packed events throughout. The story line had me nervous, sad and excited to see what would happen next." - TIME for Kids


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Official Twitter