Kadayam is a village in the district of Tenkasi in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu. It was an important hub for revolutionaries in the 1900s. Kadayam boasts a notable association with Tamil's revolutionary poet, Subramania Bharati.


== Etymology ==

Kadayam was historically known as Kadayan Patti which literally means the "Village of  Kadayans" (a specific Hindu caste).
A local legend says that its people were originally living around the Kalyani Amman temple; however, the temple goddess could not tolerate the noise created by the inhabitants, so she pulled out a Kadagam (a bracelet in ancient Tamil) and threw it outside. She instructed the people to go and reside around the spot where the bracelet fell, thus making the new area known as Kadagam which later became Kadayam.


== Climate ==


== Association with Subramania Bharati ==
The eminent poet and freedom fighter Subramania Bharati once lived in Kadayam, India. Bharati's wife was a native of Kadayam and it is believed that Bharathiar often sang patriotic songs from his in-laws rooftop. Bharathi stayed in Pazhaya Gramam of Kadayam with his family, where he was known for his daily walks to the Nithyakalayani Amman Temple, during which he stopped to hug the donkeys straying into the Pazhaya Gramam. He composed his famous Kali songs, the Panchali Sabhadam and most of his revolutionary poems including "Chinnanchiru Kiliye","Odi Vilayadu Pappa" and "Kaani Nilam Vendum" there.


== Temple Sites ==
Kadayam is known for its ancient temples scattered across the length and breadth of the village. The popular Nithyakalayani Amman Temple is in the village center. A Shastha (Thala Malayan) temple lies on the banks of the Ramanadhi (a tributary of the Thamirabarani) as well as a  Sri Pathrakali Amman Temple and Sri Muppudathiamman  Temple in Kilakadayam. The former  is dedicated to the 18 Patti (Village) people, who celebrate the 8-day festival.


== Acid Lime ==
Kadayam is famous for its acidic variety of lime. The uniqueness is due to rich soil in Kadayam. Tamil Nadu Agricultural University has released a variety PKM-1 , bred by local selection from Kadayam through its research station at Periakulam. These limes are exported to Sri Lanka and the neighboring states of Kerala and Andhra Pradesh. More than five commission markets offer lime in Kadayam. The lemon cultivated mainly from Kadayam, Papaankulam, Gothandaramapuram, Servaikaranpatti, Pulavanoor, etc.,


== References ==

Kadayam Village Facebook Page