Koh Rong Sanloem (Khmer: កោះរុងសន្លឹម, also Kaoh Rong Sanloem) is an island off the coast of Sihanoukville, Cambodia, 4 km (2 mi) south of Koh Rong island. It is around 9 km (6 mi) long (north to south), 4 km (2 mi) wide (east to west) and 1 km (1 mi) wide at its narrowest point. Its distance from the local port of Sihanoukville is 25 km (16 mi) (beeline) and 23 km (14 mi) (beeline) from the Serendipity/Ochheuteal beach pier. The word "Sanloem" translates to: 1. drowsiness and to: 2. far out and hard to discern, in a wider sense. Inconsistencies on how to spell the island's name in its Latinized version date back to the 19th century. The first controversial spelling variants were issued by map makers during French rule. Alternatives have since become widespread and are in common usage. Often confusion ensues as Google Maps offers the phonetically most consistent variant, whereas Google Search redirects to an alternative.Koh Rong Sanloem lies within Sihanoukville province's Mittakpheap district in Commune 5 (Sangkat Koh Rong). Alongside its sister-island Koh Rong it has developed into a popular holiday destination for individual travelers. With respect to the island's very tiny population, the tourism sector is by 2014 the core economy.
In 1975 the crew of SS Mayaguez was shipped to Koh Rong Sanloem, detained and interrogated by Khmer Rouge soldiers during the Mayaguez incident.


== Geography ==
The island resembles its northern sister, Koh Rong in many ways, although it has noticeably less landmass in relation to its coastline. The terrain is predominantly hilly with a few mountains of moderate size (e.g. La Chameau - The camel) and a maximum elevation of 210 m (689 ft) in the North-West. The interior is almost entirely covered in dense jungle. The coastline is characterized by a succession of sandstone rock formations and beautiful beaches. There are three yellow sand beaches at the island's long western coast. Its eastern side, facing towards the mainland and less exposed to the weather and the monsoon, is characterized by bays and headlands. A very attractive feature is the crescent shaped Saracen Beach bay with an inner diameter of around 3 kilometers. Saracen bay got its name from a British survey brig, HMS Saracen, that charted the area in the late nineteenth century. North of the island lies the uninhabited Koh Koun island, followed by Koh Rong.


== Settlements and infrastructure ==
There are two discernible villages on the island; one in the north, called M'pai Bai (which means 23 in Khmer) and one in the south, called Koh Rong Sanloem Phumi Kang Khnong (kang khnong means inside in Khmer), which is little more than a fisher's hamlet. Another little hamlet is situated in the southwest, called Phumi Kang Krau (Village on the outside). There used to be a basic road network, built during the period of the French Protectorate, which is by now almost completely overgrown with vegetation. Sole reminder of this period is a lighthouse at the island's southern tip. Depending on the season, some structures that resemble a landing field near the light house are still recognizable.
Most transport is done by boat, although the island's very narrow center permits water buffalo carts to operate. Koh Rong Sanloem is not connected to the main power grid, nor to the internet. There is local mobile phone coverage. Smart and Cellcard work best at the moment. The island is home to a base of and is administered by the Cambodian Navy.


== Tourism ==

As of 2017, Saracen Bay has established itself as the main tourist area on Koh Rong Sanloem, with more than a dozen bungalow and villa resorts. Accommodation and prices range from cheap dorm beds to modern villas with air-conditioning, wide-screen TV's, comfortable beds, and en-suite bathrooms with a hot shower and a western toilet. 
Other notable tourist destinations include ‘Lazy Beach’ and ‘Sunset Beach’ (located on the western side of the island).
The other significant tourist destination is the quaint little village of M'pai Bai (located on the northern side of the island). It considerably cheaper than Saracen Bay. The village has lots to offer with a good selection of family run guest houses and hostels. It's very laid back and a great place to recharge your batteries. You'll find the village caters for all budgets. With its own beach and two stunning beaches with in walking distance from the village. Not to mention a small water fall at the top of the hill and another one hidden away ... ...
There are 5 main ferry services between Sihanoukville and Koh Rong Sanloem, each taking approximately 40 minutes to get to the island. All services leave from the Ochheuteal (AKA ‘Serendipity’) pier in Sihanoukville. There are also a couple of ‘Slow Boat’ services that take 1.5 – 2.5 hours. These services depart from the local port of Sihanoukville and the piers at Serendipity beach and Victory beach.
Currently there are no banks or ATMs on Koh Rong Sanloem, though its neighbouring island Koh Rong now has a way to get cash out. Therefore, travellers to the island are advised to bring cash in order to pay for food, drinks, accommodation and any activities. Businesses that are operating on the island appreciate small denominations as it can be difficult to give change for large bills.


== Wildlife ==
The island's formidable jungle is the ideal habitat for a great variety of endemic invertebrate species. Vertebrates are less abundant and, typically for island populations, are small in comparison. Amphibians and reptiles are the most numerous and the island's brooks, ponds and streams are home to a variety of small freshwater fish. Birds include the great hornbill, the kingfisher and the osprey.
There is a group of macaques living on the island and rodents are very common as a consequence of human activities.
Small reefs and the rocky surface of the surrounding waters are home to a remarkable variety of marine species. Divers and snorkelers regularly emphasize the abundance of delicate miniature eco-systems, seahorses and nudibranches.


== Gallery ==

		
		
		
		
		


== See also ==
Sihanoukville
Koh Rong
Koh Sdach
Koh Pring
List of islands of Cambodia
List of Cambodian inland islands


== References ==


== External links ==

Independent Travel Guide on Koh Rong Sanloem
Cambodia Island Database-list of islands Koh Rong Sanloem travel guide from Wikivoyage