Kraków Fast Tram (pl. Krakowski Szybki Tramwaj) is a light rail network being developed in Kraków.
It consists of several modernized or purpose-built tram tracks with radio-controlled absolute priority on crossings, an underground, 1.4 kilometres (4,600 ft) long tunnel under Kraków Główny railway station with two underground stops and a 0.6 kilometres (2,000 ft) long overpass over Kraków Płaszów rail station. Contrary to many light rail systems, Kraków Fast Tram is not separate from regular tramway lines - the tracks are a part of the wider "classic" tramway network and are used by ordinary lines, which benefit from moving through a fast tram corridor. The stops at the fast tram tracks are equipped with an electronic passenger information system showing estimated departure times live. As of 2017, the system is installed on classic tram lines, too.


== History ==
The first fast tram line was opened on December 12, 2008, more than 30 years since construction start, however due to the missing tracks through Płaszów, it temporarily used the link through Kazimierz and Podgórze districts, where short pieces of track were not in its own right-of-way but connected to the traffic light control system and passenger information system. That gap was eliminated when the light rail overpass over the rail station in Płaszów opened on August 30, 2015. The construction costs amounted to 164 million złoty, of which 67 million was covered by the EU funds. It incorporates a tram stop with stairways and elevators to the rail platforms underneath and can be used by both pedestrians and cyclists, in addition to trams and emergency vehicles.


== Lines ==
In addition to the ordinary lines, there are two "fast tram lines" that run at up to 5 minute intervals on the fast tram tracks:


== See also ==
Trams in Kraków


== References ==


== External links ==
MPK Kraków, tram network operator website (in Polish)
ZIKiT Kraków, the infrastructure owner website (in Polish)
Brochure on public transport in Kraków
Map and application tracking Kraków trams live