Lamanda Park is a neighborhood in Pasadena, California. It is bordered roughly by Foothill Boulevard to the north, Del Mar Boulevard to the south, the Eaton Wash to the east, and Allen Avenue to the west, with a panhandle extending south along the western bank of the Eaton Wash.
Like Annandale, it was originally a small township that was gradually enveloped by Pasadena. It was annexed in 1920. Even today, many commercial enterprises and newspapers still identify the area as a separate community.
Lamanda is a name derived from Spanish meaning "the proposal".


== Landmarks ==
Lamanda Park's appearance is noticeably different from the rest of Pasadena. Much like Raymond Hill, it is a historically industrial area, and is notable for the presence of large warehouses, factories, lumber yards, and garages. As much of the neighborhood wasn't developed until the late 1950s, few area homes are older than 50 years.


== Education ==
Lamanda Park is served by Hamilton, Willard, and Field Elementary Schools, Wilson Middle School, and Pasadena High School


== Transportation ==
Lamanda Park is served by Metro Local lines 177, 181, 267, and 686; as well as Pasadena ARTS routes 10 31, and 60, and Foothill Transit line 187.


== Politics ==
Lamanda Park is a generally more conservative than other parts of the City, due in part to a large immigrant population and older, socially conservative residents. In the City Council, it is split between the 2nd, 4th, and 7th districts.


== History ==
Lamanda Park began as a 1,300 acres Sunny Slope Ranch large agricultural ranch  purchased and owned by German immigrant L.J. Rose. Later a number of wineries opened in Lamanda Park like: Sunny Slope Winery, Sierra Madre Vintage Company, Golden Park Winery, Mountain Wine Company, and A. Brighton Winery. These operated from 1865 to 1923. On September 16, 1885 the Los Angeles and San Gabriel Valley Railroad opened the first train stop at Lamanda Park. The rail line ran from Lamanda Park to downtown Los Angeles, with a stop at downtown Pasadena and later South Pasadena, California. By January 1887 the rail line continued on to Azusa, California and later that year to Monrovia, California. At its peak Lamanda Park has it own paper, Herald Lamanda Park, post office, movie house, bank and school. Park had many citrus groves and vineyards, the station provided shipping for these goods. Prohibition ended the wineries and all that remains are grape street names like: Del Vina, Vine, Vinedo, Vineyard, and Mataro. The last Citrus packer was Sierra-Madre Lamanda Park Citrus Association, they boxed oranges, lemons, limes, and grapefruit. The packing house was at the corner of Walnut Street and San Gabriel Boulevard. The Los Angeles and San Gabriel Valley Railroad line later became part of the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway and service to Lamanda Park ended in the 1950s. This rail right-of-way later became the Gold Line tracks and a stop returned near by with the Sierra Madre Villa station. Lamanda Park doubles as Bedford Falls in the 1946 It's a Wonderful Life movie, including a shots at the Lamanda Park train station. The station was demolished in 1953.


== References ==