Lamb Island is a small island which forms part of the Moreton Bay National Marine Park located in the southern part of Moreton Bay, near Brisbane, in Queensland, Australia. It constitutes a town and locality within the Redland City. The south/east side of Lamb Island sits within the Protection and Conservation park zone which is home to protected species of marine life including dugong, dolphins and leatherback turtles. In the 2016 census, Lamb Island had a population of 432 people.


== History ==
Lamb Island has a rich history of food production dating back to the early 1900s. The island consisted of numerous small farms which supplied produce to the mainland Brisbane market. Due to the unique micro climate created by the islands geographic location its extremely fertile volcanic soil and the pure sand aquifers that run beneath it, the farmers were able to supply superior produce to the mainland market earlier than their mainland competitors. There were several boats (including the well known historic vessels "Roo" and "Amazon") which travelled from the upper reaches of the Brisbane river out to the island to transport the produce. The Roo would also transport supplies from Brisbane for the island's residents and weekend trippers who would visit the island. One of the well known attractions was Peggy Saunders' garden parties. Peggy Saunders was the wife of one of the original farmers and was well known for her beautiful garden which was located on the Western waterfront of the island.In the late 1970s Lamb Island, like much of South East Queensland, was developed into small residential allotments. The majority of the original farm land was subdivided with only a handful of small farming lots remaining. The island has remained largely undeveloped with the majority of the small residential lots being left as vacant land. Residential development has been limited largely due to transport costs of materials and additionally many waterfront lots suffer from erosion, especially those on the high South Eastern end of the island.
In recent years, with the popularity and resurgence of organic food, the island is gaining a reputation for its unique micro climate and organically grown produce.  In addition to commercial organic growing ventures on the island, there are a number of small community garden groups engaged in organic food and ornamental plant production together with a local artisan industry with an emphasis on Permaculture values.
The Island has a very active incorporated residents' association (LIRA - Lamb Island Resident's Association) which is regularly engaged in community improvement projects which have included native tree planting, heritage site restoration/maintenance and general facility upgrades.


== Heritage listings ==
Lamb Island has a number of heritage-listed sites, including:

Lucas Drive: Lamb Island Pioneer Hall
Mango Trees on Tina Avenue which were planted over 100 years ago by the acclimatization society
Jetty Shed which has been restored by the local island community group and was used for loading local produce onto the merchant boats
Home located on Tina Avenue which was one of the original farm houses, then served as the local post office and telephone exchange.


== Demographics ==
In the 2011 census, Lamb Island recorded a population of 427 people, 50.4% female and 49.6% male. The median age of the Lamb Island population was 51 years, 14 years above the national median of 37. 69.4% of people living in Lamb Island were born in Australia. The other top responses for country of birth were England 6.8%, New Zealand 6.5%, Philippines 2.3%, Netherlands 1.6%, Germany 1.2%. 90.4% of people spoke only English at home; the next most common languages were 2.8% Tagalog, 0.9% German, 0.9% French, 0.9% Samoan, 0.9% Spanish.In the 2016 census, Lamb Island recorded a population of 432 people, 49% female and 51% male.  The median age of the Lamb Island population was 59 years. The number of private dwellings on the island was 330.


== Transportation ==
Transportation to Lamb Island is by high speed passenger ferry and vehicular barge service.  The high speed passenger ferries run approximately every half hour from approximately 4 am – midnight, 7 days per week (subject to changing timetables) and numerous residents commute daily to the mainland.  The transport terminal is located on the Southern end of Lucas Drive which is the central main road. The high speed passenger ferry takes approximately 15 minutes from the mainland. The vehicular barge transports all motor vehicles and is capable of transporting large semi trailers. The barge takes approximately 45 minutes from the mainland.
The cost of travel on the high speed ferry between the other Southern Moreton Bay Islands is free of charge.  The high speed ferry service utilizes the Queensland Government's Translink go card system.
In late 2019 a private locally operated mini bus service was introduced to the island to provide transport to and from the island's ferry terminal.
Also in late 2019 trials of Australia's first driverless bus were conducted on the smaller neighboring Karragarra Island with a view to introducing the service to the islands' communities.


== Services ==
Electricity - mainland power supply
Water - mainland water supply
Sewer - all recent and new builds must comply with advanced secondary water treatment standards
Internet/Telephone - reliable broadband internet is available due to the island accessing mainland Telstra infrastructure
Groceries - The island has its own small convenience store open 7 days per week and in addition, Woolworths provides an online home delivery weekly grocery service equivalent to that of the mainland.
Alcohol - a bottle shop is located at the Lamb Island Recreation Club
Entertainment - the Lamb Island Recreation Club incorporates a casual club style dining venue and hosts regular performing artists including musicians and comedians
Sport - a public tennis court is located next to Pioneer Hall and the Recreation ClubResidents also have access to an online car share service located on the mainland.  Share cars are available at the mainland ferry terminal, using a mobile phone app.


== Arts & Culture ==
Lamb Island was the title and subject of a 2010 short film by film maker Tim Marshall.Peter Ludlow's book entitled "Moreton Bay People" features historical figures and features of Lamb Island.The island forms part of the Redland City Council's heritage trail which identifies significant local heritage sites.Numerous art installations are located around the island including artist Antone Bruinsma's "Island Girl" which is located close to the ferry terminal.The "Girt by Sea" visual arts competition is held annually with a prize pool of approximately $90,000.  The competition is supported by the Redland City Council which has acquired several of the entries in the Girt by Sea competition and located them on Lamb Island.


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Lamb Island, Queensland at Wikimedia Commons