Let Me Be There is the third studio album by Australian singer Olivia Newton-John. It was originally released on 20 November 1973 as Music Makes My Day in the United Kingdom, by Pye International Records, and shortly after in Australia as Let Me Be There, which became its most recognizable name. In the United States and Canada, Let Me Be There was released with an alternative tracklist,  combining songs from the original release with other tracks from Newton-John's previous albums If Not for You and Olivia.
Let Me Be There marked a shift in Newton-John's career. She achieved considerable success during her early years in the United Kingdom with some folk-inspired singles, but Let Me Be There would make the United States her largest market at the time, being considered her breakthrough album in this country and influencing an inclination to a more country pop sound that would define most of her next records in the 1970s. The songs "Take Me Home, Country Roads" and "Let Me Be There" were released as singles from the album.


== Release ==
The American publication of the album by MCA Records used the cover art from Olivia's 1972 LP record Olivia, which was not released by MCA. Some of its songs were taken for the US publication, such as song titles from the British publications of the albums If Not for You and Olivia.Though the title song was a commercial failure in England, it was Olivia Newton-John's first American top ten hit, successfully boosting her singing career in North America. She had previously charted in the Billboard Top 40 with the song "If Not for You". The LP sold 89,130 copies in Japan.


== Track listing ==
"Take Me Home, Country Roads" (Bill Danoff, Taffy Nivert, John Denver) – 3:22
"Amoureuse" (Véronique Sanson, Gary Osborne) – 3:40
"Brotherly Love" (John Farrar) – 3:21
"Heartbreaker" (Russ Ballard) – 2:32
"Rosewater" (Newton-John) – 5:05
"You Ain't Got the Right" (Dennis Locorriere, Ray Sawyer, Ron Haffkine) – 3:31
"Feeling Best" (Glenn Shorrock) – 3:22
"Being on the Losing End" (Carl Groszmann, Glynne Jones) – 3:43
"Let Me Be There" (John Rostill) – 3:03
"Music Makes My Day" (Farrar) – 3:14
"Leaving" (Doug Flett, Guy Fletcher) – 3:52
"If We Try" (Don McLean) – 3:24In the United States, the album was released with artwork from her 1972 Olivia album and some different songs from this and some earlier Newton-John albums:

"Let Me Be There"  (No. 6 Pop, No. 7 Country, No. 3 Adult Contemporary)
"Me and Bobby McGee"  (from If Not for You)
"Banks of the Ohio"  (No. 94 Pop, No. 34 AC from If Not for You)
"Love Song"  (from If Not for You)
"If Not for You"  (No. 25 Pop, No. 1 AC from If Not for You)
"Take Me Home, Country Roads" (No. 119 Pop)
"Angel of the Morning" (from Olivia)
"If You Could Read My Mind" (from If Not for You)
"Help Me Make It Through the Night" (from If Not for You)
"Just a Little Too Much" (from Olivia)


== Reception ==
The album was released to capitalise on the success of its title track that had earned Newton-John a Grammy for Best Country Female. The album was certified Gold by the RIAA in 1974, and it peaked at No. 54 on the US Pop chart and at No. 1 (for two weeks) on the Country chart.


== Weekly charts ==


== References ==