Lê Minh Đảo (5 March 1933 – 19 March 2020) was a former South Vietnamese major general who led the 18th Division of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN), nicknamed "The Super Men", at Xuân Lộc, the last major battle of the Vietnam War. Brigadier General Đảo became the ground commander during the last Battle for Saigon.


== Career ==
By April 1975, North Vietnamese forces were in full advance and most ARVN resistance had collapsed. Đảo's 18th Division, however, made a significant defence at the Battle of Xuân Lộc, 38 miles from Saigon. The fierce fighting raged for two weeks. The 18th Division, facing People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN) forces, managed to hold on for three weeks, but was overwhelmed by 21 April 1975. Saigon fell nine days later.
Đảo was famous for his emotional battlefield interview that was broadcast around the world during the fighting in which he stated that, "The communists could throw their entire Army at Xuân Lộc, the 18th will stand fast" and "I will keep Long Khánh, I will knock them down here even if they bring two divisions or three divisions!”. When pressed during the battle by Peter Arnett of the Associated Press about the hopeless situation, Đảo stated "Please tell the Americans you have seen how the 18th Division can fight and die. Now, please go!" According to Dirck Halstead, by the afternoon of April 21 he knew the battle was lost and fully expected to die before it was over.Aside from Brigadier General Trần Quang Khôi, who commanded the III Corps Armored Task Force, Đảo was the only ARVN commander who stood and fought to save Saigon, before the city finally fell on 30 April 1975.
Lê Minh Đảo withdrew from Xuân Lộc by the order of Major General Nguyen Van Toan and wanted to continue fighting further south at Mekong Delta, where many South Vietnamese forces are still intact, but President Dương Văn Minh surrendered. Đảo was captured and sent by the new communist regime to spend 17 years in a "re-education camp". After his release in May 1992, Đảo received political asylum in the United States and settled there in April 1993, where he worked as restaurant manager before retiring.


== References ==


== External links ==
Conversation with Brigadier General Le Minh Dao
Welcome Back to the Paris of the Orient
The End of the Tunnel (1973–1975), PBS
Pham Ngoc Dinh, "S. Viet Generals 'Reeducated' by New Red Regime", Los Angeles Times, May 3, 1976