Mark McEwan is a Canadian celebrity chef based in Toronto. He had his own television show on Food Network Canada entitled The Heat, which followed his catering team from North 44 Caters as they served the influential and elite. He was also head judge on Food Network Canada's Top Chef Canada.


== Career ==
McEwan was born and raised in Buffalo, New York. McEwan's first restaurant job was as a dishwasher in Buffalo at Mindy’s Wine Cellar, making $1.60 an hour.McEwan graduated from George Brown College in 1979.  In 1981, McEwan was hired by the Sutton Place Hotel in Toronto as executive sous chef. Two years later he was promoted to chef. He opened his first restaurant, North 44, in 1990.  Around 2002, he opened Bymark restaurant in the Financial District, Toronto. In August 2007, McEwan opened ONE at the Hazelton Hotel, a luxury hotel in Yorkville, Toronto. In 2010, McEwan opened Fabbrica, an Italian restaurant, at Shops at Don Mills.In June 2009, McEwan opened a $6 million, gourmet food supermarket "McEwan" at Shops at Don Mills. In July 2015, McEwan opened a second 6,000 square foot location in the PATH at the TD Centre.In 2012, McEwan was commissioned by US-based OTG Management to aid in the opening of two restaurants, Fetta Panini Bar and  Heirloom Bakery Café, in Toronto Pearson International Airport, consulting on their opening menus. McEwan, his grocery store, also creates "grab-and-go" items such as sandwiches, salads, snack boxes, and meals that are sold throughout the airport at 10 different kiosks.McEwan's first book, Great Food at Home, was published in early 2011 and his second book Rustic Italian is based on the recipes from Fabbrica. McEwan teamed up with Jascor/Fresco in 2011 to brand a set of cookware that is now sold on the Shopping Channel and Hudson's Bay across Canada.Since 1990, Mark has been an ambassador for Second Harvest in Toronto, helping to spread the word about food rescue and hunger relief. He also has partnered with the Sunnybrook Foundation and sits on the board of his alma mater, with George Brown Foundation.


== TV appearances ==
The Heat with Mark McEwan - host
Superstar Chef Challenge - judge
Top Chef Canada - head judge


== References ==

Mark McEwan: "Mark McEwan is the chef that has won my utmost respect and admiration."


== External links ==
North 44 Restaurant
Bymark Restaurant
ONE - The Hazelton Hotel
McEwan Foods
FABBRICA Restaurant
Mark McEwan at the Chef and Restaurant Database
Mark McEwan on IMDb