Masayoshi Ōishi (大石 昌良, Ōishi Masayoshi, born January 5, 1980) is a Japanese musician and singer-songwriter from Uwajima, Ehime. His professional music career began in 2001 as vocalist of the band Sound Schedule. Following the band's disbandment in 2006, he began a solo career, releasing his debut single "Honoka Terasu" in 2008. Sound Schedule reunited in 2011, with Ōishi returning as the band's vocalist.
Ōishi is also vocalist of the musical group OxT, led by composer Tom Hack. In 2014, Ōishi's song "Kimi Ja Nakya Dame Mitai" was used as the opening theme to the anime series Monthly Girls' Nozaki-kun, and in 2018, his song "Otomodachi Film" was used as the opening theme to the anime series Tada Never Falls in Love. He has also written songs for other artists, such as "Yōkoso Japari Park e" which was used as the opening theme to the anime series Kemono Friends.


== Biography ==
Ōishi was born in Uwajima, Ehime on January 5, 1980. He graduated from the Kobe University of Commerce (now part of Hyogo University) and was a member of the school's light music club. In 1999, he and other members of the club formed the band Sound Schedule, making their major debut in 2001. Following the band's dissolution in 2006, he started a solo career, beginning with the release of his debut single "Honoka Terasu" (ほのかてらす) on June 25, 2008. This was followed by the release of his second single "Ushiro no Shōmen" (うしろのしょうめん) on September 24, 2008. In November of that year, he released his first album Ano Machi Kono Machi (あの街この街).In 2009, Ōishi released two singles: "Love" on June 17, and "Gensō Underground" (幻想アンダーグラウンド) on October 21, as well as his second album G.D. Attraction (G.D. アトラクション).In 2011, Sound Schedule decided to reunite after a five-year break, with Ōishi returning as the band's vocalist. Although the reunion was intended to be a temporary affair, at the end of the band's tour in 2012, it was announced that the band would continue its activities. Ōishi would remain as the band's vocalist while also continuing his solo career. In 2012, he released his third album 31 Myscream (31 マイスクリーム).In 2013, Ōishi released his fourth album Magical Music Tour (マジカルミュージックツアー). He also began collaborating with composer Tom Hack for musical releases. Their first collaboration was the single "Go Exceed!!" which was released on October 30, 2013; the title track was used as the first opening theme to the anime series Ace of Diamond. This was followed by the single "Perfect Hero" which was released on May 21, 2014; the title track is used as the second opening theme to Ace of Diamond. That same year, he released the single "Kimi Ja Nakya Dame Mitai" (君じゃなきゃダメみたい) on August 27; the title track is used as the opening theme to the anime series Monthly Girls' Nozaki-kun.In 2015, Ōishi and Tom Hack formed the musical group OxT. The group's first single was "Kimero", the title track of which was used as the second ending theme to Ace of Diamond. The group has since performed theme songs for anime series such as Overlord, Prince of Stride, and Hand Shakers. That same year, Ōishi also released his fifth album Ōishi Masayoshi no Hikigatari Lab (大石昌良の弾き語りラボ, Ōishi Masayoshi no Hikigatari Rabo).In 2016, Ōishi wrote the song "Yōkoso Japari Park e" (ようこそジャパリパークへ), which was used as the opening theme to the anime series Kemono Friends. The song became very popular in Japan, topping Amazon Japan's soundtrack ranking as well as ranking third in the country's iTunes song charts. His own cover received over one million views in the span of two weeks on Japanese video-sharing site Niconico. That same year, he wrote the song "Eien Loop" (永遠ループ) by Ami Wajima, which was used as the second ending theme to the anime series Kuromukuro. He released his sixth album Kimi ni Kikaseru Monogatari (君に聞かせる物語) on July 13, 2016.In 2017, Ōishi released his seventh album Kariuta (仮歌), which included a cover of "Yōkoso Japari Park e". The following year, he released the single "Otomodachi Film" (オトモダチフィルム, Otomodachi Firumu), the title track of which was used as the opening theme to the anime series Tada Never Falls in Love.


== Discography ==


=== Singles ===


=== Albums ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website  (in Japanese)
Masayoshi Ōishi  at Anime News Network's encyclopedia