Mediterranea is a 2015 Italian drama film directed and written by Jonas Carpignano. It was screened in the International Critics' Week section at the 2015 Cannes Film Festival. The film stars Koudous Seihon and Alassane Sy as friends who cross the Mediterranean Sea to immigrate to Italy, where they experience unexpected hostility from locals.


== Plot ==
Ayiva makes the difficult journey from Burkina Faso through Algeria and Libya and eventually reaches Italy.  He pays for his passage and sees his compatriots robbed along the way.  In southern Italy, he lives in a squatted property while earning some money from orange picking, and petty thieving, and sends some money back to his family in Africa.  The Africans are exploited for their cheap labour while not being welcomed by local villagers, although Ayiva is welcomed into the home of one Italian family, the Fondacaros.  He tried to discourage his sister from leaving Africa to try and join him in Europe.  
After one of their colleagues is attacked by Italian police, many of the refugees begin a protest against their treatment and start damaging property and cars in the village.  They are attacked in turn by some of the villagers.  This escalates into a riot; Italian police arrive and fire tear gas toward the protesters, and then attack them.  Ayiva manages to escape down a side alley but then has to flee from a crowd of angry villagers; his friend Abas is caught and beaten up.  The crowd run off at the sound of approaching sirens; Abas is left lying in the street badly injured.  Ayiva manages to get him taken back to the Fondacaro family, who try to treat his injuries.  
A local refugee charity suggests that Abas would be able to get a residency permit for a year, because of his injuries, but Ayiva says they would rather return home to Africa.  He speaks to his sister and daughter via Skype.  He is helping serve drinks for the Fondacaros at a family celebration when they invite him inside, and the film ends with the sound of the pop music from the party as Ayiva slowly walks inside.


== Cast ==
Koudous Seihon as Ayiva
Alassane Sy as Abas
Francesco Papasergio as Mommo
Pio Amato as Pio
Vincenzina Siciliano as Marta


== References ==


== External links ==
Mediterranea on IMDb