Needi Naadi Oke Katha (transl. Yours and mine is the same story) is a 2018 Indian Telugu-language drama film written and directed by Udugula Venu (in his directorial debut) and produced by Krishna Vijay, Atluri Narayana Rao and Prashanti under Aran media works. It stars Sree Vishnu, Devi Prasad and Satna Titus in the lead roles. Posani Krishna Murali and Nara Rohith appear in supporting roles.


== Plot ==
The story is about Rudra raju Sagar(Sree Vishnu) from Kurnool a middle class youth who is failing his degree continuously. It feels sad to his father(Devi prasad) who is a teacher. Sagar's sister is well in studies but he tried to get to pass but he couldn't after a critical circumstance he decided to take his studies seriously for his fathers sake and aims to become what his father wants. So for taking guidance in studies he meets Dharmika(Satna Titus) a topper through his sister. In beginning she avoids him thinking that as a flirt later she understands his intention started giving him guidance to prepare for the exams. In that process she prepares a time table for him and suggests to read self confidence books to get success. Then Sagar changes his life style which get constoned by every one. He leaves his friends for the sake of his father. Dharmika introduces Anand Ram Shankar(Posani Krishna Murali) a famous motivator to motivate himself after some comical circumstances Sagar understands that his sessions is completely a fake one which doesn't help anyone. 
Later Dharmika realises she loves Sagar and proposes him but Sagar refuses her proposal because he is a complete failure. Then Dharmika tells him that even she was also a failure because she lived in a false prestige and fake image in the mask as a topper because she does not know what she wants since her childhood her parents decided her career after getting good marks in studies all teachers and students treated her special which leads her to follow on a fake image which 90% living in this world. She realized her story is the same like Sagar which exact opposite pole to him after she meets Sagar. Then she tells him that everyone has a unique talent which they didn't recognize because of the foolish educational system which created a rat race. Then Sagar realized that he is not made for a rat race and he cannot fit for this educational system which forms in the society. Then Sagar accepts her proposal later both bunk their semester exams went to Ooty without their parents knowledge. After coming from tour their family members questions for not attending the exam then However dharmika manages from her sister but Sagar tries to convince his father to discontinue his studies and decides to start for his living but his father didn't accept his plans and argue with him later he meets a philanthropist(Nara Rohith) with his conversation he understands that all the people who are addicted for the false prestige which getting from the rat race. 
After a critical circumstance Sagar's father criticizes him that he was ashamed to be his father. Then Sagar understands that his father was also addicted to the false prestige and leaves home. Later Sagar and Dharmika went to Hyderabad and started their own living without their parents will. 
Some days later Sagar works as a cab driver accidentally meets his father in a pickup point. Then Sagar convinces his father that he is very happy as the way he is which he was working without any pressure and he says that he may be poor in his academics but he is not a dumb in the study of life. One day he will become successful in life and makes him proud.
Finally the film ends with his father allows Sagar and his wife Dharmika to his family.


== Cast ==
Sree Vishnu as Sagar
Satna Titus as Dharmika
Posani Krishna Murali as Anand Ram Shankar
Nara Rohith in a cameo appearance
V.S.Roopa Lakshmi as Sagar's mother
Devi Prasad as Sagar's father
Swethlana


== Soundtrack ==
The soundtrack was composed by Suresh Bobbili and released by Mango Music.


== Release ==
Needi Naadi Oke Katha was released worldwide on 23 March 2018.


== Critical reception ==
Critics praised the film for its realistic narration. Times of India gave 3.5/5 rating and considered that: "the film is refreshingly natural in its emotions and deserves to be seen." The Hindu praised the film for its performances and direction. 123 Telugu gave 3.25/5 rating and commented that: "Needi Nadi Oke Katha is an emotional family drama which every student and parent can relate to."


== References ==


== External links ==
Needi Naadi Oke Katha on IMDb