Nick Seddon MBE (b.1979) is a British political policy adviser, businessman, and author. He served as a senior special adviser to Prime Minister David Cameron from May 2013 to 2016. Seddon was educated at Magdalene College, Cambridge.


== Career ==
Since 2016 he has been an executive at Executive at Optum, United Health Group. He served as a senior special adviser to Prime Minister David Cameron from May 2013 to 2016 on Health and Society.
Seddon was formerly deputy director of the pro-market think tank Reform and has  served as head of communications for Circle. Prior to that he spent three years as a freelance journalist before joining the political think tank Civitas as a research fellow.It is alleged that he has been rewarded for his role during the passage of the Health and Social Care Bill 2011 where he lobbied key people to defend competition in the NHS with a place in Cameron’s health policy unit,  developing  policies for the 2015 general election.When at Reform, he advocated cutting thousands of NHS jobs. In November 2013 Reform said that the NHS could raise £3bn per year by charging for prescriptions, GP appointments and elements of hospital care.  His appointment was attacked by the Labour Party on the basis that he had  “little belief” in the traditional NHS model because he had called for frontline staff cuts, budget reductions and charges to patients.He was said by the Health Service Journal to be the ninth most powerful person in the English NHS in December 2013.He was educated at Magdalene College, Cambridge where he read English and earned a first-class degree. While at Cambridge, he was a member of the Wyverns and Ferretz Secret Societies.


== Publications ==
2000 Figures of Speech: An Anthology of Magdalene Writers with MEJ Hughes and John Mole (Magdalene College, University of Cambridge)
2007 Who Cares? How State Funding and Political Activism Change Charity (Civitas)


== References ==


== External links ==
Nick Seddon's articles:

for the Health Service Journal
for the Guardian