Nirnayam (English: Determination) is a 1995 Indian Malayalam–language medical thriller film co-written and directed by Sangeeth Sivan. The film had Mohanlal and Heera Rajgopal in lead roles.
The plot is loosely based on the American film The Fugitive, which itself is based on the 1963 TV Series of the same name.


== Plot ==
Dr. Roy (Mohanlal) is an honest surgeon who works in a private hospital. He falls in love with his apprentice Dr. Annie (Heera Rajgopal) and gets married to her. When Annie discovers a frightening organ-smuggling operation in her hospital, she is murdered. Dr. Roy is framed for the crime due to circumstantial evidence. However, on his way to jail, an accident occurs and he escapes. A fugitive from justice, he tries to discover the truth. He eventually finds aid in a police officer, Javed (Lalu Alex). Eventually, Dr. Roy is able to bring the perpetrators behind the kidney scam to justice and kill Ifti, (Sharat Saxena), his wife's murderer.


== Cast ==
Mohanlal as Dr. Roy Mathews
Heera Rajagopal as Dr. Annie
Baby Shamili as Parukkutty
Nedumudi Venu as Fr. Thayyil
Lalu Alex as Commissioner M. Javed Khan
M. G. Soman as Dr. David Kurishinkal
Jagadeesh as Dr. V.D. Iyer
Ratheesh as Dr. Marcos
Sudheer as Adv. Rajendran
Devan as Dr. Menon
Sharat Saxena as Ifti, the killer
Kuthiravattom Pappu as Dr. Roy's servant
Sukumari as Annie's Mother
Ragini as Dr. Subbu Ammal
Seetha (Malayalam actress) as Dr. Parvathi
Thampi Kannanthanam as Police officer
Augustine as Police officer
Nandhu as Police officer
Sadiq as Police officer
Ajith Kollam as Peethambaran, the fugitive prisoner
Geetha Vijayan as Doctor
Maria as Devika Rani


== Soundtrack ==
The film score and soundtrack of the film were composed by R. Anandh, a prolific composer of advertisement films.

"Malar Masam" - M. G. Sreekumar - 4:59
"Puliyanga Kolam" - M.G. Sreekumar - 4:31
"En Mizhikkullil" (Only in Audio) - K. S. Chithra - 5:30
"En Mizhikkullil" (Only in Audio) - M.G. Sreekumar - 5:30


== References ==


== External links ==
Nirnayam on IMDb