Oxshott railway station serves the village of Oxshott, in Surrey, England. It is 16 miles 79 chains (27.3 km) down the line from London Waterloo. The station, and all trains serving it, are operated by South Western Railway.
The station is on the New Guildford Line, and is served by trains from Waterloo to Guildford via Cobham.


== History ==
The station opened on 2 February 1885 as Oxshott and Fairmile. At that time the village was as Fairmile remains, less than a village, and did not have any place of worship. The brickfields here facilitated a short third track from them to a point near the station which supplied bricks for many London buildings in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.


== Services ==
South Western Railway run trains on the line every 30 minutes in each direction. Northbound trains to London Waterloo are scheduled to call at the station before stopping at Surbiton then run fast passing the three stations immediately south-west of Wimbledon. The service is stopping after Wimbledon but omits Queenstown Road, forming an inner city block of three suburban-service stops including Clapham Junction. Southbound trains run to Guildford, a junction station, and stop at all five stations on the way.


== Incidents ==


=== Oxshott A244 bridge incident, 2010 ===

On 5 November 2010, at about 3:30 pm, a cement mixer lorry fell off the bridge over the railway 50 metres north-east of the station, and landed on carriages of a train accelerating away from the station. No-one was killed. Witnesses stated that the rear of the lorry crashed through the parapet of the bridge and dragged the whole vehicle over the side of the bridge. The eight-carriage train, operated by South West Trains, was working the 15:05 Guildford to London Waterloo. The train was formed of two Class 455 electric multiple units. The lorry, loaded with concrete and weighing 24 tonnes, landed on the sixth carriage, severely crushing the end of the roof. Further damage was sustained to the fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth carriages, with the last of these being derailed at its trailing bogie, although the train remained upright. British Transport Police reported that six people on board the train sustained minor injuries, whilst the driver of the lorry had sustained more serious injuries. This was later revised to two serious and five minor injuries. The Class 455 electric multiple unit involved has since been fully repaired using a rebuilt carriage from a Class 210 diesel multiple unit and returned to service in July 2013.


== References ==


== External links ==
Train times and station information for Oxshott railway station from National Rail