The Paragons are a fictional team appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. They are one of the teams of mutants in the comic book series New X-Men: Academy X, in the Marvel Universe. They are students of the Xavier Institute and are instructed by members of the X-Men. The squad's colors are green, pink, and black.The Paragons are initially advised by original New Mutants member Wolfsbane. Wolfsbane is involved in a scandal when her romantic relationship with a student, Elixir, is brought to light. She chooses to leave before the school has a chance to fire her. Magma is assigned as the squad's new advisor.All teams of the Xavier Institute disband after "M-Day" and form into one group.


== Members ==
The members of the Paragons were:

DJ (Mark Sheppard) - Prior to his loss of powers after "M-Day", Mark could convert different types of music into various forms of energy that he could manipulate at will. His abilities are never fully explored and never shown. He dies on the bus that is attacked by Stryker in New X-Men vol. 2, #23 (April 2006).
Match (Ben Hammil) - Ben is the leader of the Paragons. His mutant ability is pyrokinesis, enabling him to produce and manipulate flames. As a side effect, his head is always aflame with low temperature fire and his body constantly glows. In addition, he is seemingly immune to fire and high temperatures. Match is one of the 27 students at the Xavier Institute to retain his powers after "M-Day". He is currently a student at the Jean Grey School for Higher Learning (a renewal of the Xavier Institute).
Pixie (Megan Gwynn) - Megan possesses butterfly wings on her back that allow her to fly. In addition, she excretes what she calls her "pixie dust" which inflicts hallucinations upon her enemies. Pixie is one of the 27 students at the Xavier Institute to retain her powers after "M-Day". She is currently a student at the Jean Grey School for Higher Learning (a renewal of the Xavier Institute).
Preview (Jessica Vale) - Jessie possesses precognitive sight. This allows her to see visions of the future. Her powers only allow her to witness future visions that are minutes in advance, but this makes her capable of predicting attacks. She is depowered after "M-Day". She is not aboard the bus that is destroyed by Stryker, but her sister, Sarah, is.
Trance (Hope Abbott) - Hope is able to project a unique astral form which can travel distances outside her body, fly, avoid physical injury, pass through objects and unleash energy blasts. In addition, it can also perceive auras and energy patterns that are invisible to the naked eye. Trance is one of the 27 students at the institute to retain her powers after "M-Day". She is currently a student at the Jean Grey School for Higher Learning (a renewal of the Xavier Institute).
Wolf Cub (Nicholas Gleason) - Nicholas possesses a permanent werewolf form that imbues him with enhanced strength, speed, agility, endurance and senses. Additionally, Gleason possesses razor sharp teeth and claws. Wolf Cub is one of the 27 students at the Xavier Institute to retain his powers after "M-Day". He is later killed by Donald Pierce.


== References ==