Phanuel is the name given to the fourth angel who stands before God in the Book of Enoch (ca. 300 BC), after the angels Michael, Raphael, and Gabriel. Other spellings of Phanuel (Hebrew: פְּנוּאֵל‎ Phənū’êl) include Paniel, Peniel, Penuel, Fanuel, Orfiel, and Orphiel. His name means "the face of God".


== Narrative ==
Phanuel was one of the four voices Enoch heard praising God.

This first is Michael, the merciful and long-suffering: and the second, who is set over all the diseases and all the wounds of the children of men, is Raphael: and the third, who is set over all the powers, is Gabriel: and the fourth, who is set over the repentance unto hope of those who inherit eternal life, is named Phanuel. (1 Enoch 40:9)


== Interpretations ==
As an angel, Phanuel is reputedly a member of the four Angels of Presence. In 1st Enoch, he is also listed as an angel of exorcism (he is heard "expelling Satans"). Phanuel has also been linked with the Angel of Penance mentioned in the Shepherd of Hermas.
Some associate Phanuel with Uriel, however, the Book of Enoch clearly distinguishes the two. Uriel means 'the Light of God' while Phanuel has a different meaning. Phanuel's duties include bearing up God's throne, ministering Truth, and serving as an angel of judgement. Furthermore, as The Book of Enoch attests, Phanuel is the angel of repentance unto hope of those who have inherited eternal life. Piecing together the writings of Enoch and the Revelation of John, Phanuel, along with Michael, Gabriel and Raphael will all drink from the 'winepress of the Wrath of God', strengthening them in that day, the Day of the Lord. Phanuel's arch-rival in the demonic hordes is Belial the Devil and father of lies. During the Battle of Armageddon, Phanuel will relinquish this rivalry, to fulfill the prophecy that Christ will destroy Belial with the word of His mouth. It is often thought that Phanuel is among the angelic voices in Revelation 11:15 saying "And the seventh angel sounded; and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever."
According to The Book of Enoch, Phanuel is the fourth angel "set over repentance and those who hope to inherit eternal life" [Enoch, Chapter 40:9]. He is the fourth voice heard [Enoch, Chapter 40:7] "fending off the Satans (adversaries or accusers) and forbidding them to come before the Lord of spirits to accuse them who dwell on the earth".


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Bunson, Matthew (ed.) (1996). Phanuel "Angels A to Z" New York. Three Rivers Press.
Lumpkin, Joseph B (ed.) (2004). The Lost Book of Enoch: A Comprehensive Transliteration of the Forgotten Book of the Bible. Fifth Estate Publishers