Quinsigamond Community College (colloq: QCC, Quinsig) is a public, community college in Worcester, Massachusetts.  A commuter school, the college has an enrollment of over 13,000 students in its Associate degree and certification programs. Many students are enrolled in transfer programs with the intent of continuing on to a four-year college or university, often the University of Massachusetts Amherst or Worcester State University, through guaranteed-acceptance programs.


== History ==

Founded in 1963, QCC occupies the Greendale campus formerly owned by Assumption College.  The College maintains multiple satellite locations in Downtown Worcester, Southbridge, MA, Marlborough, and Blackstone Valley. QCC offers day, evening, and online classes and  over 120 degree and certificate programs.


== Accreditation ==
QCC is accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges (NEASC), which accredits schools and colleges in the six New England states. Individual programs of study are also fully accredited by various agencies. These include the Commission on Dental Accreditation of the American Dental Association, the Accreditation Council for Occupational Therapy Education of the American Occupational Therapy Association (AOTA), the National League for Nursing Accrediting Commission, the Massachusetts Board of Registration in Nursing, the Joint Review Committee on Education in Radiologic Technology, the Joint Review Committee for Respiratory Therapy Education, The Commission on the Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs, and the National Association for the Education of Young Children.


== Center for Workforce Development and Continuing Education ==
Quinsigamond Community College's Center for Workforce Development and Continuing Education offers high value, low cost training programs that enable individuals to learn new skills which can be applied immediately on the job or utilized for future professional development. The focus is to provide the practical skills that can help participants improve competencies, secure employment, and experience personal enrichment. The Center for Workforce Development and Continuing Education works closely with companies and organizations so that they meet their specific organizational goals. An example of corporate partnerships include custom programs from work-based ESL to essential management skills for healthcare, manufacturing and technology professionals. The expert instructors have facilitation skills that make learning fun while providing participants with rich content relevant to a client's personal and industry specific needs.


== Team name ==
In 2010, QCC athletes became Wyverns, symbols of the House of Wessex. "A wyvern is a two-legged winged dragon-serpent that can still be seen around former Anglo-Saxon kingdoms like Worcestershire [England]," for which Worcester, Massachusetts is named.


== Notable alumni ==
Richie Barker: Major League baseball player
John Binienda: member of the Massachusetts House of Representatives
Brooke Brodack: amateur filmmaker, known for YouTube videos
Jay Cutler: professional bodybuilder and four-time Mr. Olympia
Michael O. Moore: Massachusetts State Senator for the Second Worcester District
Magdalena Rivas: contestant on America's Next Top Model (Cycle 3)
Tanyon Sturtze: Major League baseball player


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website