There are several gold girdles of Korea which have been excavated.  They are symbols of royalty but lesser belts were worn by governmental officials.  These belts have been found in the tombs of both Silla and Baekje kings and queens and the lesser nobility.  The lesser girdles can be distinguished based on their size, material used, and color.  All royal girdles follow a general scheme.  The royal girdles are made from pure gold metal plates attached to one another and are adorned with many charms, such as gogok.  The symbolism of these charms and their significance are not yet fully ascertained.  The practice of wearing girdles probably derives from Chinese traditions.


== National Treasure No. 88 ==
Geumgwanchong gwadae mit yopae (hangul 금제과대 hanja 金製과帶) (Girdle and pendants from Geumgwanchong) was designated as the 88th national treasure of Korea on December 20, 1962.  This girdle was found in the Gold Crown Tomb and is of Silla provenance.  It is currently housed at the Gyeongju National Museum.


== National Treasure No. 190 ==
Cheonmachong geumje gwadae (hangul 천마총금제과대 hanja 天馬塚金製과帶) (Gold girdle with pendants from Cheonmachong) was excavated from the Heavenly Horse Tomb and was designated as the 190th national treasure of Korea on December 7, 1978.  This girdle is also housed at the Gyengju National Museum and is of Silla provenance
This golden belt is 125 centimeters in length and is made from 44 metal rectangles.  Leather or metal rings were inserted to link the belt through nine holes in the girdle.  Hanging from the girdle are numerous charms, the symbolic meaning of these charms are still in question.  However, the charms may originate from Chinese traditions of formality from the book, Yegi.  The charms on the left of the belt include jade comma-shaped gogok, a small knife, a case for medicines, a whetstone, a flint, and tweezers.  These charms match the objects needed to perform the ancestral rites based on Chinese tradition.  The charms hanging on the right side of the belt include bone instruments worn on the thumb for use in archery, an instrument used to suspend the bow string, and a cup.
Also attached to the girdle is the Yopae which is 22.5 to 73.5 centimeters in length.  This ornament is a chain of thirteen oval-like and quadrangle-like gold plates.
Both the girdle itself and the Yopae were found worn on the waist of the person interred in the Heavenly Horse Tomb.


== National Treasure No.192 ==
Geumjegwadae (hangul 금제과대 hanja 金製과帶) (Gold girdle with pendants from north mound of Tumulus No.98) was designated on December 7, 1978 as the 192nd national treasure of Korea.
This belt is 120 centimeters in length, is made of pure gold and consists of 28 metal rectangles interlinked together.  Like National Treasure No.190, this belt holds a number of charms on its left side including comma-shaped jadeite beads, a knife, a case for drugs, a whetstone, a flint, and tweezers which correspond the tools required for honoring the ancestors according to the Yegi, a book on the lessons of formality.  On the right the charms on the belt are a bone instrument worn on the thumb for use in archery, a tool used to suspend bow strings in archery, and a cup.
The girdle was also found with the Yopae, a gold chain of 13 oval and rectangular metal plates which was attached to the main belt of the girdle via a hinge.  It is about 22.5 to 73.5 centimeters in length.  The Yopae is important because it gives clues as to how the girdle was actually worn and used.
Tomb No.98, also known as Hwangnamdaechong, is part of the ancient tomb complex of Michuwangneung District and is the largest tomb made during the Silla dynasty. (King Michu's tomb, Silla Dynasty).  The tomb is dated to be before Silla unified Korea in 688 CE.  The tumulus was excavated twice, once in 1973 and once in 1975 and is 80 meters in diameter measured from east to west, and 120 meters in diameter from north to south.  The tomb is a double mound and is shaped like a gourd.  The south entrance is 23 meters in height and the north entrance is 22 meters in height.  There is significant controversy over the identity of the people buried in the north and south tomb.  The golden girdle found in this tomb may have been for a Silla queen because there was a plaque found in the tomb which indicated that the belt was for a woman.  However, no Silla queen was recorded that matches the date of the tomb so there is still debate over who and their gender was buried in the north mound and south mound.


== Treasure No.629 ==
Geumjegwadaemityopae (hangul 금제과대 hanja 金製과帶) (Gold girdle with pendants from south mound of Tumulus No.98) is a lesser gold belt found in the South mound of Tomb No.98.  It is housed at the Gyeongju National Museum and is of Silla manufacture.
This belt is 99 centimeters in total length.  The short waist plate is 18 to 22 centimeters in length while the long waist plate measures at 79.5 centimeters in length.  The belt, like other Korean girdles, is made up square plates.  This belt has engravings on the belt and also has 34 leaf-like ornaments.  This girdle only holds seven charms.  Six dangle close to the belt while one charm hangs lower, the Yopae.  The shorter charms include a symbol of a fish and three comma-shaped beads (gogok).  This belt also has clasps on both ends which is apparently a distinguishing feature from other gold girdles.  The belt is less grand than its counterpart in the north mound of Tomb No.98 and was probably not worn by a king or queen of Silla.


== See also ==
National treasures of Korea
National treasures of North Korea
Crown of Silla
Crown of Baekje


== External links ==
Cultural Heritage: National Treasure No.88
Cultural Heritage: National Treasure No.190
Cultural Heritage: National Treasure No.192
Cultural Heritage: Treasure No.629