Shiv Nadar (born 14 July 1945) is an Indian billionaire industrialist and philanthropist. He is the founder and chairman of HCL and the Shiv Nadar Foundation. Nadar founded HCL in the mid-1970s and transformed the IT hardware company into an IT enterprise over the next three decades by constantly reinventing his company's focus. In 2008, Nadar was awarded Padma Bhushan for his efforts in the IT industry. Nadar, nicknamed by friends as Magus (Old Persian for "wizard"), since the mid-1990s has focused his efforts on developing the educational system of India through the Shiv Nadar Foundation.Ramanichandran, a prolific Tamil romance novelist is his cousin.


== Early life and education ==
Nadar was born in 1945 in Moolaipozhi Village, about 10 kilometres (6.2 mi) from Tiruchendur in Thoothukudi district (present), Tamil Nadu, India. His parents were Sivasubramaniya Nadar and Vamasundari Devi. His mother, Vamasundari Devi, is the sister of S. P. Adithanar, founder of Dina Thanthi newspaper.
Nadar studied at Town Higher Secondary School, Kumbakonam. Also, studied in Elango Corporation Higher Secondary School, Madurai. He was admitted into the first form (Sixth Standard) in June 1955 and continued his education in Town High School until June 1957. Later, he joined St. Joseph Boys Higher Secondary School, Trichy, and completed high school education here. Nadar received a pre-university degree in the American College, Madurai and a degree in Electrical and Electronics Engineering from PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore.


== Career ==
Nadar began his career at Walchand group's College of Engineering, Pune (COEP) in 1967. he soon gave it up to begin his own venture, in partnerships with several friends and colleagues. These partners were Ajai Chowdhry (Ex-Chairman, HCL Infosystems), Arjun Malhotra (CEO and Chairman, Headstrong), Subhash Arora, Yogesh Vaidya, S. Raman, Mahendra Pratap and DS Puri.The initial enterprise which Nadar and his partners began was Microcomp, a company which focused on selling teledigital calculators in the Indian market. HCL was founded in 1976, with an investment of Rs. 187,000.In 1980, HCL ventured into the international market with the opening of Far East Computers in Singapore to sell IT hardware. The venture reported Rs 1 million revenue in the first year and continued to address the Singapore operations. Nadar remained the largest shareholder without retaining any management control.


== Focus on education and healthcare ==

In 1996, Nadar founded SSN College of Engineering in Chennai, Tamil Nadu in the name of his father, Sivasubramaniya Nadar. Nadar took an active role in the college activities, including the gifting of Rs. 1 million worth of HCL shares to the college. In 2006, Nadar announced that the college will promote research apart from ensuring that students benefit from foreign university tie-ups. Nadar joined the executive board of Indian School of Business in 2005. In March 2008, Nadar's SSN Trust announced the setting up of two Vidyagyan schools in UP for rural students, where free scholarship will be provided for 200 students from 50 districts of Uttar Pradesh. He visited Town Higher Secondary School in February 2011 and donated computers and other equipment worth Rs. 80 lakhs. He served as chairman of the board of governors, IIT Kharagpur, a technical institute until 2014.


== Personal life ==
His only daughter Roshni Nadar is vice-chairman of HCL.


== Awards and accolades ==
In 2008, the government of India awarded Nadar with a Padma Bhushan, the third highest civilian award, for his contribution to the IT industry.In 2007, Madras University awarded him an honorary doctorate degree. Nadar was also recognised as E&Y Entrepreneur of the Year 2007 (Services).In 1995 he became the Dataquest IT Man of the year. the In 2005 he was bestowed with CNBC Business Excellence Award. In 2006 he received an honorary fellowship from the All India Management Association. In 2011 he was counted amongst Forbes' 48 Heroes of Philanthropy in Asia Pacific. In 2010 he received the Dataquest Lifetime Achievement Award.In April 2017, India Today magazine ranked Nadar #16th in India's 50 most powerful people of 2017 list. Nadar has committed more than $1 billion to philanthropy.


== References ==


== External links ==
Profile at HCL
Profile at Forbes
Shiv Nadar collected news and commentary at The Times of India
K@W interview with Shiv Nadar
CNN interview with Shiv Nadar