Stamp 4 refers to the stamp number, or immigration status, given to an individual with permission to reside in Ireland.  It indicates that the person is entitled to work without a work permit. It is issued to people on work visas/work authorisations, to the spouse of an Irish citizen, to the spouse of an EU citizen (Stamp 4 EUFam), to refugees, to people with Irish Born Child residency and those with long-term residency status.  Once a person has been granted Stamp 4 status by the Irish Department of Justice and Equality, he or she is to report to their local Garda National Immigration Bureau in order to receive the physical card, or "Certificate of Registration".  The card shows the holder's Stamp 4 status, as well as their photograph and other personal details.  The Stamp 4 card is proof of the person's Stamp 4 status and should be shown to employers when evidence of the person's Stamp 4 status is needed.


== EU Directive 2004/38/EC ==
Family members of EEA nationals exercising Treaty rights in Ireland in accordance with EU Directive 2004/38/EC, who are not themselves EEA nationals, are required to apply for a "Residence Card of a family member of a Union citizen", as described in Article 10 of the Directive.  In Ireland, applications for the Residence Card, are made on form EUTR1 and sent to the EU Treaty Rights Section of the Department of Justice.  Article 10(1) of the Directive requires that such applications are processed within six months of submission.  Once processed, a letter is sent to the applicant, instructing him or her to visit their local Garda National Immigration Bureau (GNIB), in order to receive their Residence Card.  The Residence Card comes in the form of a "Certificate of Registration" like any other issued by the GNIB, however a crucial distinction is made in that "Stamp 4 EUFam" is printed as the stamp number.  This serves to confirm that the holder is a family member of an EEA national who is resident in Ireland in accordance with Directive 2004/38/EC.  The Residence Card is valid for five years.


== Certificate of Registration ==

The Certificate of Registration issued by the Garda National Immigration Bureau in Ireland is a "Residence Card of a family member of a Union citizen", as evidenced by "4 EUFam" printed in the "Stamp No:" field. Although this Certificate of Registration is also a Residence Card for the purpose of EU Directive 2004/38/EC (Article 10), all non-EEA nationals resident in Ireland receive a similar card (Certificate of Registration), which displays their own stamp number, in place of "Stamp 4 EUFam".  The stamp numbers are 1, 1A, 2, 2A, 3, 4, 4 EUFam, 5 and 6.


== References ==


== External links ==
Migrant Rights Centre Ireland
Irish Naturalisation & Immigration Service (within the Department of Justice and Equality) (Stamp 4 Summary).
Citizens Information website (page specific to residence rights of EU nationals and their family members).