Sunder Sukka (Telugu: సుందర్ సుక్క; born 18 August 1978) is an Indian artist (painter) from Mahboobnagar district of Telangana State in India. Sunder Sukka is the son of a Golla Suddula performer. Golla Suddula performance is an art form which makes people aware of the socioeconomic, political and cultural conditions with an underlying message so that they can fight for their rights.


== Early life and background ==
Sunder has been running around from one art gallery to another since 2007 but, artist Sukka Sunder never got a chance to host a solo show until 2014. Sunder brought out 24 collections of artwork titled, Discourse of a People, in what was the first solo art show of his life in 2014. Ask him why it took this long and he says, "Not many were willing to let me host a solo art show. I’m glad it finally worked out."All the paintings, whether it is the recurring figure of lambs and sheep, or men and women from the village, each artwork is a "memory" for Sunder. "Things are changing in the villages. Many artist communities are fast disappearing, so this is my attempt to capture my memories," he says. When pointed out that a majority of his paintings have lambs in them he smiles, "I’ve grown up with animals around me. Lambs and sheep are very unique animals. The way they sit, their ears... everything makes for a unique subject."


== Career ==
Sunder’s tryst with art began when he was in Std V when his instincts made him grab a pen and sketch out Rani Rudramadevi. "I seemed to get everything right. I had her features sketched as exact replica of the photo. Elders at home were impressed. My inspiration to paint is my brother who is a signboard artist. Later I did paintings of leaders and as a young school boy, I made greeting cards for New Year, and gave them to friends and relatives. The response from my teachers, student friends and relatives inspired and encouraged me further."With Sunder’s interest in art continuing, he joined BFA to pursue it seriously. "Objects like the lantern, issurayyi, rolu- rokali looked interesting to me," he says as he points out works that depict these objects. He also loves to paint extinct art forms and occupations like budaga, angalollu, gangireddulollu, kommollu, sodi chepetollu, budabudukalollu and others. "I grew up watching them in our village and now life is devoid of instances where one can see such art forms. In some of my works I have represented a sensitive and unnoticed relation and the intimacy which is created or automatically formed between animals and human beings, "he explains. In his painting 'the morning clock' the village woman is compared to morning clock who works out her daily activities like a cock or hen.


== Personal life ==
The relationship that rural folk develop with their livestock in their daily survival etc. is a recurring theme throughout his paintings. This relation is an outcome of the society and "the socialist ideology" that he had developed over the years. "My father went to Madhya Pradesh as a labourer. So in some of my works I have painted the narratives of the life of the villagers as migrant labourers, their feelings at being away from their villages and family," he explains.Sunder is married to Karuna Sukka and they have a daughter.


== Awards ==
Ambadas Mahurkar Award’, Konaseema chitrakala parishad, Amalapuram -2007
‘Junior fellowship’, Ministry of Culture, New Delhi for the year 2011-13 


== Exhibitions ==


=== Solo Show ===
Exhibition of paintings titled ‘Discourse of Life’ at Tamkanat Art Gallery, Hyderabad-2014.Two man show:

Exhibition of painting and prints by Sukka Sunder and Karuna Sukka, at Shrishti Art Gallery, Hyderabad.2011.Group shows:
2015

"Affordable and Utilitarian Art Fair" of Shrishti Art Gallery, Hyderabad, January 2015.
"Hyderabad Art Fete- 2015" organized by Hyderabad Art Society, at Muse Art Gallery, Hyderabad.2014

‘Art @Telangana’, Salarjung Museum, Hyderabad.
‘Art @Telangana’, Metropolis World Congress, Hyderabad.
An art exhibition of paintings and sculptures, at Muse Art Gallery, Hyderabad.
"Kotha Panduga", First Native Telangana Artists Painting Exhibition at Chitramayee state Gallery of Fine Arts, Hyderabad, organized by Telangana Artists Forum.
"Art exhibition of paintings and sculptures’ conducted by Telangana Tourism     Department at Taramathi Bhiradari, Hyderabad.
"Art as Investment’, Tamkanat Art Gallery, Hyderabad.
"Inaugaral show" of Tamkanat Art Gallery, Hyderabad.2013

"Genesis of Memorabilia, An Exhibition of Paintings, Ailamma Art Gallery, Hyderabad.
"Art Jamboree 2013", conducted by Daira Center for Arts and Culture at Taj Deccan, Hyderabad.
"Creations- old and new" An exhibition of Sculptures, paintings and prints, Art gallery, PST University, Hyderabad.
"Within Reach-IV" group show, Nvya Art Gallery, New Delhi.2012

"Regional Art Exhibition", organized by  Lalit kala Akademi, at Lalit kala Akademi Chennai.
"Jiva" An Art Exhibition, organized by Icon Art Gallery, Hyderabad, India.
"Art Exhibition on Bio-Diversity", organized by Department of Culture, State Gallery of Fine Arts Hyderabad, A.P.2007

"Heart to Art", A group show of Paintings, Prints and Sculptures, Chitramayee State Gallery of Fine Arts, Hyderabad.
"Look Again" A group show of Paintings, Drawings and Graphics, at Hasta Art Gallery, Hyderabad.


== Art Camps ==
2015

‘Painting Art Camp’ Organized by MCHRD, Main Office, Hyderabad.2014

"Telangana Art Camp" of Art@Telangana, at Taramathi Biradari premises - 2014, held on the occasion to mark the Historical event of formation of new state of Telangana, Hyderabad.2013

Art camp organized by A P Tourism Department in Nagarjuna konda, A.P.
Workshop: Innovating traditions: interactive use of techniques between Nakashi and contemporary artist, organized by Icon Art Gallery, Hyderabad, A.P.2012

National Artists Art Camp at Deccan Art Foundation, Hyderabad.2007

A.P. State artist camp organized by Department of Culture, Hyderabad.2006

A.P. State artist camp– Organized by Department of Culture, Warangal.2004

Annual Artist Camp, Central University, Hyderabad.
Print making camp under Pinaki Barua from Shantineketan at Hyderabad Central University.
Young Artists Camp- organized by State Art Gallery of Fine Arts, Hyderabad.


== Collections ==
MCHRD, Hyderabad
Department of folk culture - PST University, Warangal.
Apollo Hospitals, Hyderabad


== References ==


== External links ==
[ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9mN12q9oP_8], Interview