The Patriotic Knights is a Chinese wuxia television series adapted from Liang Yusheng's novel Xiagu Danxin. It was directed by Kuk Kwok-leung, and starred Chen Long, Stephanie Hsiao, Wallace Chung and He Meitian. It was first shown in China in 2010 on Guizhou TV even though it already completed shooting in around 2006–2007.  The Tai Seng DVD set was released in 2007.


== Plot ==
The series is set in the late Ming dynasty during the reign of the Tianqi Emperor, when the government is very corrupt on all levels. The eunuch Wei Zhongxian dominates the political scene and plans to bring the wulin (martial artists' community) under his control and usurp the throne. He instigates Meng Shentong to kidnap Li Shengnan, the leader of the Heavenly Demonic Cult, and force her to hand over a highly coveted martial arts manual, the Baidu Zhenjing. The great hero Jin Shiyi interferes, rescues Li Shengnan, and combines forces with her to defeat Meng Shentong. However, Li Shengnan eventually dies from her injuries. Jin Shiyi feels deeply saddened by her death and decides to leave the mainland and settle on a remote island.
20 years later, Wei Zhongxian feels threatened by Jiang Haitian, Jin Shiyi's apprentice, who has garnered much support from the wulin and started a rebel movement against the Ming government. Shi Baidu, the chief of the Six Harmonies Sect, has secretly defected to Wei Zhongxian's side and promised to help Wei deal with the rebels. The opportunity arises when Jiang Haitian invites guests from throughout the wulin to attend his daughter's wedding during the Qixi Festival. Shi Baidu's younger sister, Shi Hongying, is a righteous and kind person, unlike her brother. She tries to advise her brother against helping Wei Zhongxian but he ignores her, so she sneaks out of the house and travels to Jiang Haitian's residence to warn him about the impending danger.
Around this time, Jin Shiyi's son, Jin Zhuliu, sets foot on the mainland and goes on a series of adventures. By chance, he encounters Li Nanxing, Li Shengnan's nephew, and becomes sworn brothers with him.


== Cast ==


== External links ==
(in Chinese) The Patriotic Knights on Sina.com