Time, Forward! (Russian: Время, вперёд!, Vremya, vperyod!) is a 1965 Soviet drama film directed by Sofiya Milkina and Mikhail Schweitzer based on a novel with the same name and a screenplay by Valentin Katayev. The film was produced by Mosfilm, a unit of the State Committee for Cinematography (Goskino). The famous musical score was composed by Georgy Sviridov.
The title is derived from Vladimir Mayakovsky's play The Bathhouse (Russian: Баня).


== Plot summary ==
The film is set in the 1930s, depicting one day of the construction work of Magnitogorsk Iron and Steel Works (or Magnitka). The characters are construction workers and Komsomol members who are eager to work. Learning that their colleagues in Kharkov have set a record, they are mobilized in order to beat them. Everyone at the construction site has embraced socialist competition. They are ready to win at any cost to speed up construction and complete the work on time. A Moscow journalist comes to cover the scope of the great construction project, seeking a hero for his story.


== Cast ==
Sergei Yursky as David Margulies
Inna Gulaya as Shura Soldatova
Tamara Syomina as Olya Trigubova
Leonid Kuravlyov as Korneyev
Vladimir Kashpur as Kanunnikov
Stanislav Khitrov as Sayenko
Yefim Kopelyan as Nalbandov
Bruno O'Ya as Thomas Bixby
Tatyana Lavrova as Klava
Aleksander Yanvaryov as Ishchenko
Mikhail Kokshenov as Kanunnikov
Yuri Volyntsev as Writer
Viktor Sergachyov as Semechkin
Larisa Kadochnikova as Katya
Igor Yasulovich as Vinkich
Vadim Zobin as Mosya
Viktor Markin as Reporter
Radner Muratov as Zagirov
Klara Rumyanova as Lushka
Boris Yurchenko as Filonov


== Theme ==
Sviridov's orchestral suite written for this film was one of the most recognizable music pieces of the Soviet era, and became a sort of calling card for the Soviet Union itself. Since 1986 it has been used as the theme song of Vremya, the TV news program on USSR Central Television and Russian Channel One (although the tune has been re-orchestrated a few times since then). It was also used as the opening theme for the four-part Channel 4 documentary Spitfire Ace in Great Britain.
The theme has been used in subsequent films, most notably Theodore Ushev's Tower Bawher and Guy Maddin's short film "The Heart of the World". 


=== Olympics association ===
It was performed at the close of the 2010 Olympic ceremony in Vancouver, conducted live by Valery Gergiev, to present the 2014 Winter Olympics, which were held in Sochi, Russia. At the 2014 opening ceremony in Sochi, the theme was used again during a scene depicting national industrialization and the collectivization of agriculture in the Soviet Union. The dancers wore red and black costumes while they interacted with huge figurative tractors, giant ditch-diggers, gears, and similar engine parts. The Russian rhythmic gymnastics team used the Overture in their gold medal winning all-around routine at the 2016 Summer Olympics.


== References ==


== External links ==
Time, Forward! at AllMovie
Time, Forward! on IMDb
Listen to the main theme