Honduras is a tourist destination that attracts visitors to its natural environment, white and dark sand beaches, coral reefs, abundant flora and fauna and archaeological sites. Other attractions include the area's customs and traditional foods.


== History ==

The territory of modern Honduras was discovered in the fourth trip of Christopher Columbus between 1502 and 1503, at that time it was called Guaymuras or Hibueras by local Indians, was followed by the conquest of the inhabitants and later the exploration of land, which involves the making both geographic maps, as coastal charts and of navigation.
In 1526 the conquistador Don Hernán Cortés learned through díceres that in the jungle of the Honduran Mosquito Coast was a city of such splendor as Tenochtitlán, called here the Ciudad Blanca in which its buildings were completely white; Cortés undertook the trip to Honduras to find this great city, then in 1544 the Bishop of Comayagua, Fray Cristóbal de Pedraza assured having crossed the jungle of the Mosquitia and come to a white city. One of the explorers of Cortés was Captain Don Pedro de Alvarado the advanced was carrying many cartographers and clerks who recounted the exploits and discoveries on their trips, another character was Don Diego García de Palacios while He is exploring the landscapes and mountainous areas between Guatemala and Honduras, across the Motagua River he found the Mayan city of Copán, he made many notes of the vestiges saw, the wonderful stone buildings and bewilderment that produced those remnants of a civilization that was evident in his report written in 1576.
Later John Lloyd Stephen also he narrates his discoveries and adventures in the work that later published "Incidents of Travel in Mexico, Yucatan and Central America." Other characters who collected and recounted his travels by the Honduran territory: Friar Esteban Verdalet, who is considered a martyr because he was killed at the hands of the Indians Tawahkas and Lencas ,.Jesuit priest José Lino Fábregas he born in San Miguel de Tegucigalpa and who would conduct its studies at the University of Mexico and conducted extensive research on the Aztec civilization in that country, Fábregas was withdrawn of the brotherhood due to his works published for teaching in Italian “EZPLICAZIONES DELLE FIGURE HIEROFICHE DEL CODICE BORGIANO MESSICANO, DEDICATA AL ECCELESTISSIMO E REVERENDISSIMO PRINCIPEIL SIGNORE CARIDINALES BORGIA”.
The dedication of the Bishop of Honduras at that time Friar Jerónimo de Corella who with his conservative vision take the bishopric of Trujillo (Honduras) to Comayagua, followed by Bishop Fray Fernando Cardiñanos adventurer who traveled the territory and drafted several reports of censuses for the Spanish crown, so it was possible to give out a how places and parishes existed in Honduras, other of the informants exponents was Don Alejo Conde García who in 1790 he was the first to report the arrival of Galician settlers to Gracias a Dios, while he was Governor of Honduras.
In 1805 Colonel Ramón de Anguiano also reported on population census, the problems of the province and the attack at Trujillo by the British this came the idea of putting more defense in the Fort of Santa Barbara and send to build the Fortress of San Fernando the largest Spanish fortification in Central America; with the arrival of the Abbe Brasseur de Bourboug to the site of Copán in 1864, was impressed by the Mayan remains, also in a note of that year it appears as are and his companions the Mrs. Rob Owen and Osbert Salm taken pictures of the place.
1855 George Eprahim Squir published his notes on Honduras, in the work The States of Honduras and San Salvador. Squir, came to Honduras through the construction of Honduras National Railway.For 1857 the Spanish Antonio Calvache publishes a brochure about his explorations in Honduras.in 1881 reached Copán the English archaeologist Alfred Percival Maudslay who makes the deepest studied of this Mayan site, then come other scientists, professionals and scholars who have participated in giving to the world, how is Honduras and many others in the US, Europe and Asia, were perplexed by the stories and details embodied in them, so they started the tourist "boom" to these lands. Another important factor was the arrival in the final decade of the 19th century and beginning of 20th century of the US transnational banana companies like Vaccaro Bros., the Standard Fruit Company, etc. who besides source work, several were the Americans who did so to speak tourism from that country to the Honduran north coast, thus forging a shipping tourist route.


=== First Honduran tourist route ===
Since the first decade of 20th century American tourist boats made the following route of the points considered most tourist highlight. Vapors ships departed from New Orleans, roamed the Gulf of Mexico, Tampico, port of Veracruz, around the Yucatan peninsula, arrived at the Honduras coast where their destinations were Puerto Cortés, Tela, La Ceiba and Trujillo, returning by Bay Islands, Caribbean Sea, go through the Havana in Cuba and return to the United States.


== Tourist diversity ==

Honduras is visited by visitors from around the world for several reasons, including the visit of its forests, islands and beaches by cruise ships, aircraft or road, being its main engines eco-tourism, cultural tourism and archaeological tourism.


=== Ecotourism ===

Honduras is an ideal place for eco tourism, has many forests, beaches, coral reefs and a variety of protected areas ideal for sightseeing, it is estimated that in Honduras there; about 8,000 plant species, about 250 reptiles and amphibians, more than 700 species of birds  and 110 species of mammals, distributed in different ecological regions of Honduras.
Honduras is very popular because of the beauty of the coral reefs in the Bay Islands, the Cochinos Cays and the beautiful beaches in Roatán. Another tourist destination is the Río Platano Biosphere, among other points of special interest 


=== Archaeological tourism ===

Always in the 19th century was when experts archaeologists, epigraphers and Mayanists they were dumped in to the rescue of the city of Copán is as the government of Honduras implement an economic program and cooperation with international organizations, universities and specialized museums with the sole purpose of preserving the archaeological site. In turn, placing it on the tourist map with other Mexican and Guatemalan Mayan cities, which were the first to be opened to the public. Honduras currently has museums exclusively with remains of the Mayan civilization.
There is a strong interest of the international community for archaeological sites like the city of Copán was built and occupied in a period where the Mayan culture had its most literal expression, ruled by a dynasty of 16 kings The Mayas of Copán built many temples, altars and steles in high and low relief, also has the ball park, is one of the most visited by tourists in Honduras.


=== Cultural tourism ===


==== Museums ====

Honduras has a variety of museums, among which are the Villa Roy Republican History Museum, the Museum of the Honduran Man, the Museum of Anthropology and History, the Honduran Aviation Museum and Museum of National Identity (Honduras), among others.

National Archives of Honduras
National Library of Honduras
Museum of the Casa Presidencial of Honduras,
Barracks San Francisco Military Museum,
Museum of Banco Atlantida S.A.,
Museum of Central Bank of Honduras,
Pinacoteca of Central Bank of Honduras,
Manuel Bonilla National Theatre,
Museum of Anthropology and History (Honduras),
Museum of National Identity (Honduras),
Museum of the Honduran Man,
Honduran Aviation Museum,


==== Historical tourism ====

Fortress of San Fernando,
Historical Mallol Bridge,
Basilica of Suyapa,
Metropolitan Cathedral of San Pedro Sula,
Fortress of Santa Bárbara,
Fort San Cristóbal (Gracias).


=== Coastal tourism ===
Honduras has several tourist spots on its coasts, including:

Bay Islands
La Ceiba
Tela
Puerto Cortés
Amapala
Lake Yojoa
Omoa
Cochinos Cays
Trujillo


=== Tourism to interior of the country ===

It also has places of interest to visit in the interior of Honduras, in the Honduran territory can be found in their municipalities, examples of the Baroque architecture of the Spanish colonization, churches that hold to the Christian tradition of making its temples in Latin cross, altarpieces, altars and images, evoke the colonial past.

Tegucigalpa and Comayagüela,
San Pedro Sula,
La Ceiba,
Comayagua,
Choluteca,
Tela,
Santa Rosa de Copán,
Siguatepeque,
Gracias,
Catacamas,
Santa Bárbara,
La Esperanza,
Danlí,
Juticalpa,
Ocotepeque.


== Climate ==

Another major attraction of Honduras is its tropical climate, has average temperatures above 18 degrees Celsius throughout the year, so it never frosts or no snowfall in the region, making it a paradise for tourists from countries of temperate zones.
In Honduras are two seasons, the rainy season between May and November and the dry season, between the months of December to April.
Due to its tropical climate it receives many visits of tourists from North America and Europe during winter between the months of December and March. Also it is visited by tourists from South America, Southern Africa and Australia in its winter months between June and September.


== Security ==
The country has the tourism police of Honduras (policía de turismo de Honduras) responsible for protecting tourists, also provides security the National Police of Honduras, the main contact number is 911. Also the police often have cooperation with Honduras Army.

Places where to go: Public Ministry of Honduras (Ministerio Público de Honduras), National Police of Honduras (Policía Nacional de Honduras), Honduran Red Cross (Cruz Roja Hondureña), Fire Department of Honduras (Cuerpo de Bomberos de Honduras).


== Infrastructure ==
Honduras has an extensive hotel infrastructure in major cities, many 5 star hotels with swimming pools, cable TV, broadband internet, next to the beach.


=== Transport ===

Honduras has many means of transport to move nationwide, with several air routes connecting the country through its main airports, several international ports for receiving cruise ships and tourists. It also has broad highways that connect major cities and extensive network of roads connecting the other cities in the country and a railway system.


==== Aerial boom ====

It was after of World War I where it knew the benefits and versatilities of the aircraft and is as well as countries interested in forming an Air Force, also aeronautical engineers also viewed the ability to move people in such devices and so is designed that larger aircraft and in order to transport. In Honduras after the First Civil War of Honduras or “Revolución del 19” was the president in functions General Rafael López Gutiérrez who would be interested in buying aircraft for Armed Forces and turn that nationals obtain their title of airplane pilot, it happened that opened a flying school and sent to build airstrips, then the country and its main tourist cities had airports for transport of civilians, in the early 1930s opened the air mail and the trade routes, selling airline tickets in 1933 cost about 35 Lempiras.


==== Honduran railway ====
In the 20th century during the presidential administrations of the conservative Captain General José María Medina began with the works of National Railroad of Honduras, devised in the foreground both to unite the north coast to the south coast in the Gulf of Fonseca, but this work because of mismanagement and actors lost credibility and it entangled in a tremendous debt, the lines that were installed not become the planned and the project was stalled, so the banana companies it benefited only to transport their produce to Honduran major ports and the train intended for civilians did not carry much tourist clientele, until now that is in bankruptcy.


==== Pan-American Highway ====
The International or Pan American Highway crosses the country, before it was in the middle of 20th century when it were sent to build the major highways in Honduras, joining the villages to the cities.


== Ministry of Tourism ==
The head of the Ministry of Culture, Tourism and Sports is responsible for ensuring the maintenance of tourism resources of the country, and to give the necessary attention and publicity in foreign countries, promoting and encouraging these resources in stands of international fairs of societies with greater economic acquisition. Similarly project to Honduran culture within social circles of the world, as national athletes who are the representatives of the distinctive and national colors in world sporting events.


== See also ==
Secretariat of Foreign Affairs (Honduras)
Secretariat of Tourism (Honduras)


== References ==


== External links ==
 Honduras travel guide from Wikivoyage