The TU Dresden (abbreviated as TUD or Technical University of Dresden) is a public research university, the largest institute of higher education in the city of Dresden, the largest university in Saxony and one of the 10 largest universities in Germany with 32,389 students as of 2018.The name Technische Universität Dresden has only been used since 1961; the history of the university, however, goes back nearly 200 years to 1828. This makes it one of the oldest colleges of technology in Germany, and one of the country’s oldest universities, which in German today refers to institutes of higher education that cover the entire curriculum. The university is a member of TU9, a consortium of the nine leading German Institutes of Technology. The university is one of eleven German universities which succeeded in the Excellence Initiative in 2012, thus getting the title of a "University of Excellence". The TU Dresden succeeded in all three rounds of the German Universities Excellence Initiative (Future Concept, Graduate Schools, Clusters of Excellence).


== History ==
In 1828, with emerging industrialization,   the "Saxon Technical School" was founded to educate skilled workers in technological subjects such as mechanics, mechanical engineering and ship construction. In 1871, the year the German Empire was founded, the institute was renamed the Royal Saxon Polytechnic Institute (Königlich-Sächsisches Polytechnikum). At that time, subjects not connected with technology, such as history and languages, were introduced. By the end of the 19th century the institute had developed into a university covering all disciplines. In 1961 it was given its present name, Technische Universität Dresden (Dresden University of Technology).

Upon German reunification in 1990, the university had already integrated the College of Forestry (Forstliche Hochschule), formerly the Royal Saxony Academy of Forestry, in the nearby small town of Tharandt. This was followed by the integration of the Dresden College of Engineering (Ingenieurshochschule Dresden), the Friedrich List College of Transport (Hochschule für Verkehrswesen) the faculty of transport science, and the “Carl-Gustav Carus” Medical Academy (Medizinische Akademie or MedAk for short), the medical faculty. Some faculties were newly founded: the faculties of Information Technology (1991), Law (1991), Education (1993) and Economics (1993).
In 2009 TU Dresden, all Dresden institutes of the Fraunhofer Society, the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Scientific Community and the Max Planck Society and Forschungszentrum Dresden-Rossendorf, soon incorporated into the Helmholtz Association of German Research Centres, published a joint letter of intent with the name DRESDEN-Konzept - Dresden Research and Education Synergies for the Development of Excellence and Novelty, which points out worldwide elite aspirations, which was recognized as the first time that all four big post-gradual elite institutions declared campus co-operation with a university.


== Campus ==

TU Dresden is a campus university in most aspects. Some of its buildings are more than a hundred years old (such as the buildings around Muenchner Platz square). The architecture of these buildings is mostly influenced by the art nouveau style or the Bauhaus school (e.g. the Chemistry building Fritz-Foerster-Bau). In recent years these historic building have been complemented by modern buildings (e.g. the library, the main auditorium, the biochemistry department or the life sciences building).
The main campus, as well as the medical faculty and that of Computer Science, are all within the boundaries of the city of Dresden. The main campus is located South of the city center, mostly in the area bordered by Nöthnitzer Straße, Fritz-Förster-Platz and Münchner Platz; the medical faculty can be found in the Johannstadt district. The faculty of forestry, formerly the Royal Saxon Academy of Forestry, resides in a forest area in the nearby town of Tharandt.


== Organization ==
TU Dresden has 14 faculties. Almost all faculties are located on the main campus South of the city center, except for the Faculty of Medicine that has its own campus near the Elbe river East of the city center and the Department of Forestry in Tharandt.


=== Sciences ===
With 4,390 students the Faculty of Mathematics and the Natural Sciences is the second-largest faculty at the university. It is composed of 5 departments, Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, Physics and Psychology. The departments are all located on the main campus. In 2006, a new research building for the biology department opened. In October 2006 the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft decided to fund a new graduate school, the Dresden International Graduate School for Biomedicine and Bioengineering and a so-called cluster of excellence From Cells to Tissues to Therapies.


=== Engineering ===

The Faculty of Architecture comprises 6 departments. Currently, there are 1,410 students enrolled.
The Faculty of Civil Engineering is structured into 11 departments. It is the oldest and smallest of the faculties. There are currently 800 students enrolled.
The Faculty of Computer Science comprises six departments: Applied Computer Science, Artificial Intelligence, Software- and Multimedia-Technology, Systems Architecture, Computer Engineering and Theoretical Computer Science. The faculty has 2,703 students.
The Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology is organized into 13 departments. There are 2,288 students enrolled. The faculty is the heart of the so-called Silicon Saxony in Dresden.
The Faculty of Environmental Sciences has 2,914 students. The faculty is located on the main campus, except for the Forestry department which is located in Tharandt. The Forestry department is the oldest of its kind in Germany. Its history goes back to the foundation of the Royal Saxon Academy of Forestry (Königlich-Sächsische Forstakademie) in 1816.
The Faculty of Mechanical Engineering comprises 19 departments and has 5,731 students. It is the largest faculty at TUD.
The Faculty of Transport and Traffic Sciences “Friedrich List” is the only of its kind in Germany covering transport and traffic from economy and system theory science to electrical, civil and mechanical engineering. There are 1,536 students enrolled.


=== Humanities and Social Sciences ===
The Faculty of Business and Economics comprises five departments, Business Education Studies (Wirtschaftspädagogik), Business Management, Economics, Business Information Systems and Statistics. There are 2,842 students enrolled.
The Faculty of Education, located East of the main campus, has 2,075 students.
The Faculty of Languages, Literature and Culture is structured into five departments, American Studies, English Studies, German Studies, Philology, Romance Languages and Slavic Studies. There are 3,215 students at this faculty.
The Faculty of Law is going to close in the next few years. Currently there are still 933 students enrolled. The TU Dresden has partially compensated the closure by establishing a private law school
The Faculty of Philosophy comprises seven departments, Art History, Communications, History, Musicology, Political Sciences, Sociology and Theology. There are 3,485 students enrolled.
The School of International Studies is a so-called central institution of the university coordinating the law, economics and political sciences departments for courses of interdisciplinary international relations.


=== Medicine ===
The Carl Gustav Carus Faculty of Medicine has its own campus East of the city center near the Elbe river. Currently, there are 2,195 students enrolled. The faculty has a partnership with Partners Harvard Medical International.


=== Research Centers ===
Center for Advancing Electronics Dresden (cfaed) - Cluster of Excellence
Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden (CRTD) - Cluster of Excellence
Dendro-Institute Tharandt at the TU Dresden
The European Institute for Postgraduate Education at TU Dresden (EIPOS Europäisches Institut für postgraduale Bildung an der Technischen Universität Dresden e. V.)
The European Institute of Transport (EVI Europäisches Verkehrsinstitut an der Technischen Universität Dresden e. V.)
The Hannah Arendt Center for Research on Totalitarianism (HAIT Hannah-Arendt-Institut für Totalitarismusforschung an der Technischen Universität Dresden e. V.)
Center for Media Culture (MKZ Medienkulturzentrum Dresden e. V. an der TU Dresden)
Center for Research on Mechanics of Structures and Materials (SWM Struktur- und Werkstoffmechanikforschung Dresden GmbH an der Technischen Universität Dresden)
TUD Vietnam ERC, the TU Dresden Vietnam Education and Research Center. The center offers a Master's course in Mechatronics in Hanoi (Vietnam) since 2004.
Center for Continuing Education in Historic Preservation (WBD Weiterbildungszentrum für Denkmalpflege und Altbauinstandsetzung e. V.)
School of International Studies (Zentrum für Internationale Studien, ZIS in German)


== Research ==
The TU Dresden benefits from the strong research tradition in microelectronics and transport sciences in the Dresden area, but also from the establishment of new research fields such as Biotechnology.


=== Biotechnology and Medical Technology ===
The university has established a strong partnership with the Max Planck Institute for Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics in molecular bioengineering. As part of the German Universities Excellence Initiative, the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft has decided to fund the Cluster of Excellence "From Cells to Tissues to Therapies: Engineering the Cellular Basis of Regeneration" (DFG-Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden), as well as a new graduate school, the "Dresden International Graduate School for Biomedicine and Bioengineering" with about 300 PhD students.
The Center of Biotechnology ("BIOTEC") is a unique interdisciplinary center focusing on research and teaching in molecular bioengineering. The BIOTEC hosts top international research groups dedicated to genomics, proteomics, biophysics, cellular machines, tissue engineering, and bioinformatics.


=== Magnetism and Material Sciences ===
The Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft funds research in the area of electromagnetic flow influence in metallurgy, artificial crystal formation and electrochemistry. Other research is done on the Meissner effect and artificial fibers (textile).


=== Micro and Nanotechnology ===
Silicon Saxony is the biggest cluster of the microelectronics industries in Europe. TU Dresden is incorporated in this network with three departments of the Faculties of Electrical Engineering and Sciences. Together with the Fraunhofer Center for Nano-electronic technologies (CNT) it represents one of the leading universities in the field of nanotechnology. There is also a research cooperation with some semiconductor fields of TU Freiberg. In May 2012 the Helmholtz-Kolleg NANONET was founded.


=== Transport ===
The university has a partnership with the Fraunhofer-Institut for Transport and Infrastructure systems to research on IT-systems for public transport in Dresden.


=== Business and Economics ===
In partnership with TU Dresden, the Ifo Institute of Economic Research (Ifo Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung e.V.) is researching the economic development in Eastern Germany.
The university belongs to a consortium of European Universities offering the Erasmus Mundus Joint Doctoral Programme IT4BI-DC for Business Intelligence.


=== Other research areas ===
The Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft supports the university in many areas and TU Dresden cooperates closely with renowned research institutes such as Fraunhofer Society, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Scientific Community and Max Planck Society.
Neuromorphic computing facility
TU Dresden received a grant of 8 million euro from the EU's Human Brain Project to build the second generation spinnaker computer called spincloud.


== Reputation ==

Measured by the number of DAX board members, no top manager in the German economy was a graduate of the TU Dresden in 2019.According to the QS Engineering and Technology Ranking the university ranked 113th worldwide and 5th in Germany. According to the Times Higher Education World University Rankings the university ranked 157th worldwide and in engineering & technology the university ranked 90th worldwide. Moreover, According to Reuters, the university was ranked 79th in the list of 'Most Innovative Universities Ranking 2019'.The Eduniversal Business Schools ranking ranks the university's Faculty of Business and Economics with 3 out of 5 palmes of excellence. According to the university ranking 2016 of the German business magazine Wirtschaftswoche the university ranked 7th in Germany in computer science and mechanical engineering and 6th in Germany in business informatics and engineering management. The university did not take first place in any of the ranked subjects: Business Administration, Business informatics, Engineering management, Natural Sciences, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and Economics.


== International cooperations ==
As one of the first universities in Germany it has opened a branch in Hanoi, Vietnam offering a Master's course in mechatronics. It also maintains close partnerships with leading universities around the world, e.g. Boston University, Georgetown University, Harvard Medical School, Tongji University and POSTECH.


== Student life ==


=== General ===
Of the roughly 35,000 students, 45% are studying Engineering Sciences, 36.2% Humanities and Social Sciences, 12.5% Natural Sciences and Mathematics and 6.3% Medicine.
About 59% (20,620) of the student body originates from Saxony, 18.9% (6,626) from other Eastern German federal states, 12.3% (4,306) from the Western German federal states and 9.8% (3,442) from other countries.
Of the 20,620 students from Saxony, 12,351 (59.9%) are from Dresden, 2,934 (14.2%) from the Dresden metro area and 5,335 (25.9%) from other parts of Saxony.
The origin of the students is based on the location where the A-level exams have been completed.


=== International students ===
There are 3,442 international students enrolled at the TU Dresden (2005/2006). Most of the foreign students come from Europe (1,527), followed by Asia (1,404) and America (170). Ranked by countries the largest group of students comes from China (710), followed by Poland (294), Vietnam (196), Bulgaria (160) and Russia (154). The university is also quite popular among Central and East European countries such as the neighboring Czech Republic or Ukraine. Also, through the Erasmus programme and partnerships with universities in the USA, there are many English, French and Spanish speaking students. The language spoken during lessons is nearly always German on most faculties. To prepare for admissions to the university, many foreign students attend German language courses at the University affiliated language school TUDIAS-Sprachschule.
International students interested in TU Dresden should visit the websites of the "Akademisches Auslandsamt" (International office) for more information. This office is responsible for handling international applications. In the end of 2011 13.7% of beginning students came from abroad.
A number of activities for international students facilitates their integration and help students to find new friends. Most notably the Erasmus-Initiative TU Dresden offers many group activities throughout the semester which are open to all students (not only to Erasmus participants). A student run program, the LinkPartnerProgramm matches every interested international student with a German student, to help him or her with questions arising during the first weeks, be it regarding course registration or any other issue students might have.


=== Leisure activities ===
Sports are very popular among the TUD students. There are eight big students' clubs and the summer campus party is considered to be the biggest in Germany. There are cafeterias as at most universities and the largest refectory can compete with some restaurants even as far as menu size.


=== Performing arts ensembles ===
Among the many groups at the TU Dresden are four major ensembles. These four include the theater group "Die Bühne" which has a small ensemble directed by professionals, and the folk dance group "Folkloretanzensemble Thea-Maass" which is dedicated to reviving regional styles of dance. The last two groups are the largest by far and these are the University Choir and the University Orchestra, both having student and non-student members of all ages. In 1997 a part of the University Orchestra branched off into a chamber ensemble, becoming the "TU-Kammerphilharmonie", and since it consists almost exclusively of students the ensemble rehearses and performs only during the academic year. Each of these major ensembles performs an average of one to four times per semester. These performances often take place in Saxony but also occasionally internationally.


== Funding ==
The university is currently developing new strategies to make itself more independent from state funding and decision making. With regard to its ability to generate research money from industry partners, the TU Dresden belongs to the most successful in Germany. In 2004 3,564 projects were financed with 104.1 million Euro from outside sources (other than state funds). It has one of the highest shares of income by industry partnerships.


== Points of interest ==
Botanischer Garten der Technischen Universität Dresden, the university's botanical garden
Forstbotanischer Garten Tharandt, the university's historic arboretum
Archives of the university


== Notable people ==


=== Honorary doctors ===
1905 Wilhelm von Siemens – Industrialist
1906 Ferdinand von Zeppelin – Lieutenant general and airship pioneer
1928 Heinrich Rickert – Philosopher
1928 Fredrik Ljungström – Engineer, inventor
1981 Konrad Zuse – Civil engineer and computer scientist who built the world's first programmable computer
1987 Karl Reinisch – Engineer
1989 Kurt A. Körber – Entrepreneur who founded Körber Group
1990 Günther Landgraf – Physicist, rector of TU Dresden from 1990 to 1994
1995 Václav Havel – Writer, dissident and first president of the Czech Republic
1999 Kofi Annan – Former United Nations Secretary-General
2002 Walter Kohn – Physicist, recipient of the 1998 Nobel Prize in Chemistry


=== Honorary senators ===
1997 Günther Landgraf – Rector of TU Dresden 1990–1994
2000 Günter Blobel – Recipient of the 1999 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine


=== Faculty ===
Manfred von Ardenne – Physics
Heinrich Barkhausen 1911–1953 (not continuously) – Communications technology. Discoverer of the Barkhausen jumps, a manifestation of domain wall movement in magnets.
Alfred Baeumler 1924–1933 – Nazi-philosopher and educationalist
Kurt Beyer – Civil engineering
Manfred Buchroithner — Cartography
Adolf Busemann – Aerodynamics
Carl Gustav Carus – Medicine
Gerhard Fettweis – Engineering
Klaus Fuchs – Nuclear technology, soviet spy
Hanns Bruno Geinitz – Geology
Gustav Kafka 1923–1934 – Psychology
Victor Klemperer 1920–1935 – Professor for romance studies; He wrote “LTI”, an analysis of the Nazi's language, and detailed dairies during the Nazi time.
Richard Kroner 1924–1928 – Philosopher (Religion)
Luise Krüger – Athlete
Günther Landgraf – Physics, first freely elected rector of TUD
Nikolaus Joachim Lehmann 1921–1998 – Mathematician, professor, first lectures in informatics in the GDR 1967
Wilhelm Gotthelf Lohrmann – Astronomer, Geodete
Richard von Mises – Mathematician, Professor for Hydro- und Aerodynamics
Maria Reiche - (1903-1988) - mathematician, archaeologist, and technical translator has studied in this University.
Roland Scholl 1918–1934 – Chemist; director of the institute for organic chemistry
Wilhelm Steinkopf 1919–1940 – Chemist
Paul Tillich 1925–1929 – Philosopher (Religion)
Gustav Zeuner – Engineer


=== Alumni ===
Afroz Ahmad
Carl Theodor Albrecht – Surveyor
Fritz Bleyl – (Architecture) Architect and painter of expressionism
Kwong-Chai Chu (朱光彩) – Chinese hydraulic engineer who received his CIE (Chinese Institute of Engineers) Award in 1947
Carl Enckell – (Mechanical Engineering) Finnish politician
Erik von Frenckell – (Engineering) a sports administrator, member of IOC and vice president of FIFA
Steffen Heidrich – (Business Management) Former footballer
Rudolph Hering – (Civil Engineering)
Katja Kipping – Chairwoman of German Left Party
Max Littmann – (Civil engineering) Architect
Reimund Neugebauer – (Mechanical Engineering) Designated President of Fraunhofer Society
Theodor Pallady – Romanian painter
Evgeny Paton – (Engineering) Ukrainian
Ernst Otto Schlick – (Engineering) Shipbuilding engineer
Herbert Seifert – Mathematician
Johannes Paul Thilman – (Science of Culture) Composer
Stanislaw Tillich – (Mechanical Engineering) Minister-President of Saxony


== See also ==
List of forestry universities and colleges


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
TU Dresden Vietnam ERC – Branch of TU Dresden in Hanoi, Vietnam