Tum Se Achcha Kaun Hai is a 2002 Indian Hindi musical romantic drama film directed by Deepak Anand. Starring Nakul Kapoor, Kim Sharma and Aarti Chhabria, it was released on 26 April 2002.


== Plot ==
Working as a guide and bus driver in Jaisalmer, Arjun (Nakul Kapoor) had always dreamt of being a famous singer. When he meets beautiful tourist Naina Dixit (Aarti Chhabria), he impresses her with his singing. She encourages him to come to Bombay to try his luck there and leaves her address with him. Shortly thereafter, Arjun bids farewell to his brother, his Bhabhi, and nephew and goes to Bombay. Upon arrival he meets Naina's friend, Monto (Raghuvir Yadav), who takes him to several places to try his luck. No one bothers to listen to him, let alone hear him sing.
He lives with Naina, her sisters, Anu and Tuktuk, and their college professor mom (Rati Agnihotri), who empathize with him. Then Naina hits upon an idea to have an open song-and-dance show in a public park. The show goes well, and a wealthy young woman, Bobby Gujral (Kim Sharma), notices Arjun and invites him to sing for a firm run by her dad's partner, Sunil Mahadevan. When Sunil refuses to get involved, Bobby talks to her dad and opens her own recording company featuring Arjun as the main artist.
Arjun becomes famous overnight but has not forgotten Naina and her family. This does not augur well with Bobby, who is very possessive and wants Arjun all to herself. She makes up her mind that she will never permit anyone to come close to Arjun—she has a gun and knows how to use it. But soon she realizes that she can't get him as he belongs to Naina and loves her only. Unable to cope with the pressure of losing her love, Bobby tries to commit suicide by throwing herself from the hill with her car. After some time, Arjun is shown receiving the award for best singer and thanking Bobby. Then it is shown that Bobby now in a mentally handicapped condition is watching Arjun Live.


== Cast ==
Nakul Kapoor as Arjun Singh
Rati Agnihotri as Professor Dixit
Aarti Chhabria as Naina Dixit
Adi Irani as Amar Deep
Ali Asgar as Ali
Viju Khote as Inspector Vijay Chander
Anant Mahadevan as Sunil Mahadevan
Neha Pendse as Anu Dixit
Girja Shankar as Arjun's brother
Kim Sharma as Bobby Gujral
Dalip Tahil as Gujral
Raghuvir Yadav as Manto


== Soundtrack ==
All the songs are composed by Nadeem-Shravan and lyrics were penned by Sameer. The songs were very popular.


== External links ==
Tum Se Achcha Kaun Hai on IMDb
Review by Taran Adarsh
Review by Rediff
Review by Planet Bollywood