Venice International University (VIU) is an international center for higher education and research located on the island of San Servolo, in Venice, Italy.

It was established on December 15, 1995 as a consortium of five Universities and two Italian Institutions.
Since its foundation, Venice International University has grown to include a total of eighteen members (as of October 29, 2016):
Boston College of the United States.
Duke University of the United States.
Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, Germany. (German: Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität.)
Tel Aviv University of Israel.
Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Tsinghua University of Beijing, China.
Ca' Foscari University of Venice, Italy. (Italian: Università Ca' Foscari Venezia.)
University IUAV of Venice, Italy. (Italian: Università IUAV di Venezia.)
European University at Saint Petersburg, Russia.
Waseda University of Tokyo, Japan.
Metropolitan City of Venice, Italy. (Italian: Città metropolitana di Venezia.)
University of Padua, Italy. (Italian: Università degli Studi di Padova.)
University of Bordeaux, France.
National Research Council (Italy).
University of Lausanne, Switzerland.
Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique of Quebec City, Canada. (English: National Institute of Scientific Research).
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Italy. (Italian: Università degli Studi di Roma "Tor Vergata".)
KU Leuven of Belgium. (Dutch: Katholieke Universiteit Leuven.)


== SHSS - School of Humanities and Social Sciences ==
The School of Humanities and Social Sciences (SHSS) offers university courses, intensive seminars, extra-curricular and co-curricular activities and summer schools during the two academic semesters (Fall and Spring) that are held every year. All courses are offered in English by professors from the Member Universities and they are open to all students in the Member Universities.


== TEDIS Center ==
TEDIS (Center for Studies on Technologies in Distributed Intelligence Systems) is a research center established within Venice International University in 1999. The center carries out research on innovation and competitiveness, under the supervision of an international management committee. TEDIS has also developed a joint research program on industrial districts, globalization, and global value chains in cooperation with Duke University Center on Globalization, Governance and Competitiveness.
TEDIS research focuses on four main areas:

Industrial Districts, Technologies and Networks
SMEs, Local Clusters and Internationalization
Creativity, Design and Innovation
Transport, Logistics and Supply Chain Management


== TEN Center ==
The Center for Thematic Environmental Networks (TEN) is a training and research center in the field of environment and sustainable development. In 2003, the Italian Ministry of Environment, Land and Sea selected TEN Center as the scientific partner for its Capacity Building activity within the Sino-Italian Cooperation Program for Environmental Protection as well as for the Course on Sustainability for East European countries, Central Asia and the Black Sea Region.


== VIU Campus ==

Venice International University is located on the island of San Servolo, in buildings that were once a monastery and were then turned into a military hospital and later on into a psychiatric hospital which was disbanded in 1987. In 1995 the buildings underwent a meticulous restoration work and the island now offers a park with sport grounds, a cafeteria, a bar and some works of art by contemporary international artists, such as Kan Yasuda, Pietro Consagra, Fabrizio Plessi and Sandro Chia. VIU facilities include lecture rooms, conference and seminar rooms, a library, pc rooms and broadband wi-fi connection. A public boat service connects the island to Venice historical center.


== Notable people ==
Prominent scholars who have taught at Venice International University include:

Caroline Bruzelius, Professor of Art and Art History
Orin Starn, Professor of Cultural Anthropology and History
Kristine Stiles
Josep Montserrat i Torrents


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Venice International University on Facebook
Venice International University on Flickr
Venice International University on Twitter