WEDJ is a Regional Mexican radio station licensed to Danville, Indiana in the United States. The station serves the Indianapolis radio market at 107.1 FM. WEDJ broadcasts at an effective radiated power of 1,800 watts with a tower located Northwest of Danville in Hendricks County.  Studios and offices are located at 1800 North Meridian Street in Indianapolis.


== History ==
The station began as a Danville-based radio station, WGRT in 1975. Gordon Graham, Steve Miller, and Steve Ross first owners.  Steve Miller was first General Manager and Steve Ross first Program Director. Big Mark Edwards and Rick Allan were first part-timers. The call letters were changed to WATI in 1984, then were changed to WGRT-FM in September 1987 and once again to WSYW-FM in the late 80s.
As WSYW-FM, the station programmed classical music as 107.1 "Symphony 107".  Programming on WSYW-FM was simulcasted on sister station AM 810 WSYW until the AM station became a Radio AAHS affiliate.  Classical programming was dropped in the mid-90s in favor of Smooth jazz as "Silk 107.1"  Programming was provided by Jones Radio Network's Smooth Jazz 24/7 format.  Also, around this time, WSYW-FM was leasing out various hours throughout the day to Spanish-language broadcasters, providing the first on-air outlet in Indianapolis for Spanish programming.  This continued until October 1999, when the station changed format to Active rock as WEDJ.
WEDJ, known on-air as 107.1 The Edge, went on the air in mid-October 1999.  However, after only a week using the branding, the station's name was changed to Rock 107 due to copyright issues with "The Edge" name.  The format provided an alternative to crosstown station, X 103, but signal issues in much of the Indianapolis market made it difficult to compete.  
In late 2000, the station was brokered to two companies providing the station with two different Spanish-language formats.  WEDJ became the first FM station and the second full-time station programming to Latinos in Indianapolis, preceded only by sister station, WSYW 810.  Once the contracts expired, WEDJ began programming its own programming first as "La Ley" then as "Radio Latina".  The station under both names aired a Spanish CHR format.  In late 2006, Radio Latina was revamped and flipped format to Regional Mexican where it remains to this day.


== External links ==

Query the FCC's FM station database for WEDJ
Radio-Locator information on WEDJ
Query Nielsen Audio's FM station database for WEDJ