The Zhejiang University of Technology (Chinese: 浙江工业大学; pinyin: Zhèjiāng Gōngyè Dàxúe) is in the city of Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province. It is considered one of the top industrial universities in mainland China and the second largest university in Zhejiang Province after the most comprehensive Zhejiang University.
Engineering, especially chemical and biological engineering, are its strongest disciplines. During the 1980s it made an effort to become a comprehensive technological university instead of a technological college. It keeps a close and broad relationship to the industry.
It is a typical technical university of the new generation in China. It followed the trend during the 1980s and 1990s of Chinese technical institutes changing from the Soviet specialized style into a much more comprehensive style.


== History ==
Although the history of the Zhejiang University of Technology can be traced back to 1910, its independence (establishment) as a college was in 1953 as the school claims officially. It became a comprehensive technical university in 1993.
The institute has had different names throughout its history:

Parts of the National Zhejiang University, (1910~1949)
Hangzhou Chemical Engineering College (1953~)
Zhejiang Chemical Engineering College (1960~1980)
Zhejiang Engineering College (1980~1993)
Zhejiang University of Technology (1993~now)Schools that joined the Zhejiang University of Technology:

Zhejiang Academy of Economics and Management attached to Zhejiang Provincial Planning and Economic Commission, November 1994
Hangzhou Industrial Engineering School of Shipbuilding attached to China State Shipbuilding Corporation (CSSC), July 1997
Zhejiang Industrial Engineering School of Building Materials attached to Zhejiang Provincial Building Material Corporation, March 2001


== Campuses ==
 
In Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province:

Urban
Chaohui Campus (or Zhaohui Campus), the headquarters
Suburban
Pingfeng Campus
Zhijiang Campus
Liuxia Campus, for adult education and continuing education
Xiasha Campus (former campus of shipbuilding)In Quzhou, Zhejiang Province:

Suburban
Zhexi Campus serves the Quzhou Chemical Engineering Group (one of the biggest national chemical enterprises).
Quzhou College


== Colleges and departments ==

The College of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science
The College of Mechanical Engineering
The College of Information Engineering
The College of Business and Administration
The College of Civil Engineering and Architecture
The College of Biological Engineering and Environmental Engineering
The College of Humanities
The College of Pharmaceutical Science
The College of Science
The College of Law
The College of Foreign Languages
The College of Art
The College of Jianxing
The College of Politics and Public Administration
Zhijiang College
The College of Adult Education
International College
The College of Educational Science and Technology
The College of Vocational and Technical Education
The College of Software Engineering
Software Vocational College
The Department of Physical Education and Military Training


== Key laboratories ==

National Key Laboratories
National Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology
National Key Laboratory and Developing Field of Green Chemosynthetic Technology
Provincial Key Laboratories, at least 7


== School-owned corporations ==
Hangzhou Gongxin Photoelectron Ltd.
Well Information Technology Ltd.
Rongda Corp.
Donghui Technology Co., Ltd.
Yonghong Education & Research Development Co., Ltd.
Enma Co., Ltd.
Bluehouse Electronics Co., Ltd.
Xiangyuan Hotel


== People ==
Notable alumni:

Xu Guangxian, chemist
Zhang Zhixiang, Chinese steel magnate
Zhou Guangyao, Academician of Chinese Academy of Engineering
Zheng Yuguo, Academician of Chinese Academy of SciencesPresidents:

Li Shouheng, founder of Chinese chemical engineering, former dean of Zhejiang University [1]
Li Enliang: civil engineer
Shen Yinchu, academician of Chinese Academy of Engineering, "father of Chinese new generation pesticide" [2]
Zhang Libin, roboticist


== See also ==
League of Key Universities in Chang Jiang Delta
Along with Zhejiang University in Hangzhou, Shanghai Jiaotong University in Shanghai, Southeast University in Nanjing, Fudan University in Shanghai, a student exchange program is held every year between these six key universities.


== References ==


== External links ==
Zhejiang University of Technology website
English language version
Jing Hong Network Union
Campus real three-dimensional map